python : Ignoring wrong pointing object 6 0 (offset 0)
At C:\Users\berna\AppData\Local\Temp\ps-script-a0c4dde1-95e6-43ec-b883-fee028f179fd.ps1:92 char:28
+ pip install pypdf -q 2>&1; python -c "
+                            ~~~~~~~~~~~
    + CategoryInfo          : NotSpecified: (Ignoring wrong ... 6 0 (offset 0):String) [], RemoteException
    + FullyQualifiedErrorId : NativeCommandError
 
Ignoring wrong pointing object 15 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 17 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 21 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 28 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 30 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 32 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 37 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 42 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 45 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 47 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 49 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 51 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 54 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 63 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 77 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 79 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 118 0 (offset 0)
Ignoring wrong pointing object 333 0 (offset 0)
--- PAGE 1 ---
 
  

--- PAGE 2 ---
FOREWORD The shift from Outcome-Based Curriculum (OBC) to Competence-Based Curriculum (CBC) under the 2023 Zambia Education Curriculum Framework (ZECF) represents a paradigm shift in how we assess learner achievement. This Assessment Blueprint serves as a comprehensive guide for educators and teachers to understand and apply the principles of Competence-Based Assessment (CBA) across all subjects at the Ordinary Secondary Level (Forms 1-4). The architecture of CBA rests on two fundamental pillars: School-Based Assessment (SBA) comprising 30% of the final score, and the Final Examination comprising 70%. This guide unpacks the structure, design principles, and implementation strategies for both components, providing subject-specific examples drawn directly from the 2024 syllabi. As Zambia embraces the 21st Century Skills framework, this guide ensures that assessment is not merely about what learners 
, but what they can 
 with that knowledge in real-world contexts. Prepared by: Bernard Tito CBC/STEM Ambassador Subject Teacher, Mathematics Mkushi Secondary School, Mkushi Contact: Email: wanatito@gmail.com  Phone: +260 974 896 855 ⌐ 2026 Bernard Tito. All rights reserved.            
--- PAGE 3 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS PART ONE: FOUNDATIONS OF COMPETENCE-BASED ASSESSMENT 1.1 Introduction to Competence-Based Assessment 1.2 The Shift from OBC to CBA 1.3 Key Terminology in CBA 1.4 The Assessment Architecture 
PART TWO: ASSESSMENT STRUCTURE AND BLUEPRINT 2.1 Component 1: School-Based Assessment (SBA) 2.2 Component 2: Final Examination 2.3 Construct and Elements of Construct Framework 2.4 Item Design and Taxonomy 2.5 Marking Schemes and Rubrics 
PART THREE: SUBJECT-SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT GUIDELINES 3.1 Mathematics (Mathematics I and II) 3.2 English Language 3.3 Biology 3.4 Chemistry 3.5 Physics 3.6 Civic Education 3.7 History 3.8 Geography 3.9 Religious Education 3.10 Zambian Languages 3.11 Literature in English 3.12 Computer Studies/ICT 3.13 Physical Education and Sport 
--- PAGE 4 ---
3.14 Art and Design 3.15 Music Arts 3.16 Food and Nutrition 3.17 Travel and Tourism 3.18 Agricultural Science 
PART FOUR: ADMINISTRATION AND LOGISTICS 4.1 SBA Submission Procedures 4.2 Examination Timetabling 4.3 Accommodation for Special Needs 4.4 Quality Assurance Mechanisms 
PART FIVE: CONCLUSION AND APPENDICES 5.1 Summary of Key Changes 5.2 Sample Examination Papers 5.3 SBA Recording Templates 5.4 Glossary of Command Terms 
        
--- PAGE 5 ---
 PART ONE: 
 1.1 Introduction to Competence-Based Assessment 1.1.1 Defining Competence In the context of the 2023 Zambia Education Curriculum Framework (ZECF), competence refers to the ability to apply knowledge, skills, values, and attitudes to solve real-world problems. Unlike traditional assessment that measured recall of facts, CBA measures what learners can do with their learning. The Zambian education system recognises twelve key competences that learners must develop: S/N COMPETENCE DESCRIPTOR 1 Analytical Thinking Break down problems, evaluate situations and solutions 2 Citizenship Engage in civic activities, promote social justice, show respect for human dignity 3 Collaboration Work effectively in groups, respect diverse perspectives 4 Communication Use appropriate language, express thoughts clearly 5 Creativity and Innovation Generate new ideas, undertake projects 6 Critical Thinking Analyse texts, solve complex problems 7 Emotional Intelligence Manage emotions, empathise with others 8 Environmental Sustainability Show personal role in environmental management 
9 Problem Solving Analyse situations, identify resources, develop plans 10 Digital Literacy Use digital devices and software appropriately 11 Entrepreneurship Identify business opportunities, create business models 12 Financial Literacy Manage personal and business finances 1.1.2 Why Competence-Based Assessment? Traditional assessment in Zambia focused on: ò Memorisation and recall ò Paper-and-pencil tests ò Isolated knowledge components ò Summative evaluation only Competence-Based Assessment focuses on: ò Application and synthesis ò Practical tasks and projects 
--- PAGE 6 ---
ò Integrated knowledge, skills, and values ò Continuous formative and summative evaluation  1.2 The Shift from OBC to CBA 1.2.1 Historical Context ò 2023: Government approves the 2023 ZECF, shifting from Outcome-Based Curriculum to Competence-Based Curriculum ò 2025: Roll-out of CBC begins at ECE Level 1, Grade 1, and Form 1 ò 2024-2026: Training of ECZ staff, Ministry of Education staff, and examiners in CBC and CBA principles ò 2026: Distribution of SBA Guidelines and Assessment Schemes to schools 1.2.2 Key Changes in Assessment ASPECT OUTCOME-BASED ASSESSMENT COMPETENCE-BASED ASSESSMENT 
Focus What learners know What learners can do Question type Knowledge recall Application and synthesis Context Abstract scenarios Real-life Zambian contexts Components Multiple papers (Paper 1, Paper 2) Single theory paper + SBA SBA weight 0% (or minimal) 30% of final score Multiple choice Used at all levels Primary only (EPSC); secondary = no multiple choice 1.3 Key Terminology in CBA 1.3.1 Construct Definition: A construct is what an assessment is designed to measure. It includes specific knowledge, skills, abilities, behaviours, or attitudes that the assessment should measure. In simple terms, a construct is the broad theme of a subject (focus or assessment area). Example from Geography: "Analyses spatial relationships, human-environmental interaction, and sustainable development using geographical tools and technologies." 1.3.2 Elements of Construct (EoC) Definition: Elements of Construct are the smaller components or sub-themes that make up a construct. They break down the construct into clear, manageable parts that we should be able to assess. Example from Geography (Elements of Construct for the above example): 
--- PAGE 7 ---
1. "Understands demographic dynamics and its relationship with the environment and humanity in order to identify strategies for sustainable development." 2. "Understands population dynamics and connectivity to nature in order to identify strategies to manage demographic dynamics and promoting sustainable development." 1.3.3 Relationships Between Elements of Construct The ECZ framework identifies three types of relationships: 1. Related Competences (Grouping): Grouping competences that naturally share properties (e.g., Numbers, Sets, and Index Notation together). 2. Competence Overlap (Scaffolding): Competences that sequentially build upon one another (e.g., progressing from Fractions to Decimals to Percentages). 3. Integration Potential (Merging): Competences that can be seamlessly assessed in tandem without confusion (e.g., evaluating Measures alongside Approximations). 
1.4.2 Examination Footprint Reduction The shift to CBA has significantly reduced the examination burden: LEVEL OBC PAPERS CBC PAPERS REDUCTION EPSC 16 papers 14 papers 2 papers removed ECSEOL (Secondary) 51 papers 40 papers 11 papers removed Note: Psychological tests (Special Paper 1 and Special Paper 2) have been removed as the competences (problem-solving, analytical thinking, critical thinking) are now integrated into every subject 

--- PAGE 8 ---
PART TWO: 
 2.1 Component 1: School-Based Assessment (SBA) 2.1.1 Overview School-Based Assessment is compulsory for all learners in all subjects from Forms 1 to 4. Teachers set, administer, and score SBA tasks within the normal teaching and learning process. Key Principles: ò SBA tasks must be contextualised to real-life situations ò Each subject has only two components: SBA (Component 1) and Final Examination (Component 2) ò No SBA is administered in the year of examination (Grade 6 and Form 4) ò GCE candidates receive an alternative paper to SBA, developed by schools/districts (ECZ provides a specimen) 2.1.2 Types of SBA Tasks The types of SBA tasks vary by subject but generally include: TASK TYPE DESCRIPTION EXAMPLE Projects Extended investigations Research project on local biodiversity Practical tasks Hands-on activities Designing and making a product Assignments/Homework Structured tasks Essay writing, problem sets Presentations Oral/visual demonstrations Group presentations on cross-cutting issues Fieldwork Data collection outside classroom Survey on water quality in local stream Portfolios Collections of work over time Art portfolio, writing portfolio Observations Teacher observation records Performance in physical education End of term tests Formal written tests Termly examinations 2.1.3 SBA Administration Guidelines Submission Requirements: ò SBA scores must be submitted to ECZ annually in raw form ò At each grade or form, teachers submit scores out of 100 (translating to 200 for both EPSC and ECSEOL) ò Submission deadline: 31st January of the following year Example: SBA scores for Form 1, Form 2, and Form 3 learners of 2026 should be submitted on 31st January, 2027.   
--- PAGE 9 ---
2.1.4 SBA Guidelines Distribution SBA Guidelines for all subjects at primary and secondary levels will be distributed in the second quarter of 2026. 2.1.5 Sample SBA Task Structure Every SBA task should include: 1. Context/Scenario: A real-life Zambian situation 2. Task: Clear instructions on what the learner must do 3. Materials Provided: List of resources available 4. Assessment Rubric: Criteria for evaluation 5. Demonstration: What the learner must show after completing the task Example Structure (from Mathematics): 
 MATERIALS PROVIDED: (i) Cardboard  (ii) Glue  (iii) Scissors  (iv) Ruler  (v) Pencil  (vi) Eraser   (vii) Protractor  YOUR MODEL MUST: 1. Clearly show integers from -20 to +20 with equal spacing 2. Include a movable marker to demonstrate addition and subtraction of integers 3. Have a label showing zero and positive/negative directions 4. Be sturdy enough for regular classroom use  

--- PAGE 10 ---
2.2 Component 2: Final Examination 2.2.1 Overview The Final Examination is a standardised, externally administered theory paper for each subject. Key features: ò One consolidated theory paper per subject (no more Paper 1 and Paper 2 separately) ò All test items for EPSC are multiple choice ò Secondary level (Form 1-4) has no multiple choice questions ò Items and tasks are contextualised to solving real-life situations 2.2.2 Examination Structure by Subject (Proposed) Based on the syllabi and ECZ guidelines, the following structure is proposed: SUBJECT SBA WEIGHT THEORY PAPER WEIGHT DURATION Mathematics I 30% 70% 2 hours 30 mins Mathematics II 30% 70% 2 hours 30 mins English Language 30% 70% 2 hours 30 mins Biology 30% 70% 2 hours Chemistry 30% 70% 2 hours Physics 30% 70% 2 hours Civic Education 30% 70% 2 hours History 30% 70% 2 hours Geography 30% 70% 2 hours 30 mins Religious Education 30% 70% 2 hours Zambian Languages 30% 70% 2 hours 30 mins Literature in English 30% 70% 2 hours 30 mins Computer Studies 30% 70% 2 hours Physical Education 40% (practical) 60% (theory) 2 hours Art and Design 30% 70% 2 hours 30 mins Music Arts 30% 70% 2 hours Food and Nutrition 30% 70% 2 hours Travel and Tourism 30% 70% 2 hours Agricultural Science 30% 70% 2 hours 30 mins 2.2.3 Question Types for Secondary Level No multiple choice questions are used at secondary level (Forms 1-4). Instead, the following question types are used: QUESTION TYPE DESCRIPTION COGNITIVE LEVEL Structured/Short answer Brief responses to specific prompts Low-Moderate 
--- PAGE 11 ---
Scenario-based Multi-part questions based on a single context Moderate-High Problem-solving Application of knowledge to novel situations High Extended response Essays, explanations, arguments High Calculations Mathematical working with reasoning Moderate Practical application Applying theory to practical situations High Case study analysis Analysis of given case studies High Data interpretation Interpreting graphs, tables, diagrams Moderate 2.2.4 Bloom's Taxonomy Alignment Items should be distributed across cognitive levels: COGNITIVE LEVEL PERCENTAGE QUESTION TYPES Remembering 10-15% Definitions, listings Understanding 20-25% Explanations, examples Applying 25-30% Scenarios, calculations Analysing 15-20% Comparisons, breakdowns Evaluating 10-15% Judgments, critiques Creating 5-10% Designing, composing 2.2.5 Contextualisation Requirements All examination items must be contextualised to real-life Zambian situations. Examples of Zambian contexts: ò A market vendor in Soweto Market, Lusaka ò A farmer in Mkushi planting maize ò A minibus driver in Kitwe ò A teacher at David Kaunda Secondary School ò The Victoria Falls in Livingstone ò Copper mining on the Copperbelt ò Traditional ceremonies (Kuomboka, Ncwala, Umutomboko, Likumbi lya Mize)  2.3 Construct and Elements of Construct Framework 2.3.1 How Constructs Are Developed Constructs are developed after thorough syllabus analysis and interpretation. For each subject, the Construct represents the exit competence that learners should demonstrate by the end of Form 4. Process: 1. Analyse syllabus objectives and competences 2. Identify the broad theme of each subject 3. Break down into measurable Elements of Construct 
--- PAGE 12 ---
4. Validate through expert review 2.3.2 Subject Construct Examples Example 1: Geography CONSTRUCT ELEMENTS OF CONSTRUCT Analyses spatial relationships, human-environmental interaction, and sustainable development using geographical tools and technologies 
1. Understands demographic dynamics and its relationship with the environment 2. Understands population dynamics and connectivity to nature 3. Applies map reading skills in real-life contexts Example 2: Mathematics CONSTRUCT ELEMENTS OF CONSTRUCT Demonstrates numerical proficiency, critical thinking, logical and spatial reasoning to solve problems in real life 1. Interprets and performs operations on numbers 2. Applies algebraic thinking to solve problems 3. Uses spatial reasoning to solve geometric problems 4. Interprets data to make informed decisions Example 3: English Language CONSTRUCT ELEMENTS OF CONSTRUCT Communicates effectively and confidently in English language both orally and in writing 1. Listens and responds appropriately in various contexts 2. Speaks fluently with appropriate pronunciation 3. Reads and comprehends various text types 4. Writes clearly and coherently for different purposes 2.3.3 Mapping Constructs to Assessment Items Every examination item must be mapped to a specific Element of Construct. This ensures validity and reliability of the assessment. ELEMENT OF CONSTRUCT QUESTION NUMBER MARKS EoC 1: Number operations 1(a), 1(b), 2 15 
--- PAGE 13 ---
EoC 2: Algebraic thinking 3, 4(a), 4(b) 20 EoC 3: Spatial reasoning 5, 6, 7 25 EoC 4: Data interpretation 8, 9 20 Total  80  2.4 Item Design and Taxonomy 2.4.1 Principles of CBC Question Formulation The Examinations Council of Zambia has outlined key principles for formulating CBC questions: 1. Single, rich context: All tasks arise naturally from one scenario 2. Thematic grouping: Related competences are assessed together 3. Real-life application: Questions must be contextualised to solving real-life situations 4. No isolated abstract calculations: Every calculation must serve a purpose within the context 5. Elements of Construct grouping: Multiple EoCs from the same construct can be combined in one scenario 2.4.2 Question Format Specifications For Each Question or Scenario: 1. Context/Scenario - A realistic Zambian situation (2-5 sentences) 2. Tasks - Numbered sub-questions (3-5 tasks per scenario) 3. Marks - Clearly indicated for each task 4. Space for response - Adequate space for working/answers 5. Total marks - Sum of all tasks Example Format: 
--- PAGE 14 ---
2.4.3 Command Terms and Their Meanings COMMAND TERM MEANING EXAMPLE 
State/List Provide a simple answer without explanation List three causes of soil erosion 
Define Give the precise meaning of a term Define photosynthesis Describe Give a detailed account Describe the process of digestion Explain Give reasons for an event or phenomenon Explain why the leaves turn yellow Calculate Work out using mathematical operations Calculate the area of the field Compare Describe similarities and differences Compare modern and traditional farming Contrast Focus only on differences Contrast the UNIP and MMD governments Analyse Break down into components Analyse the causes of the 1994 Rwandan genocide Evaluate Make a judgement based on criteria Evaluate the effectiveness of the SBA system Design Plan and create Design an experiment to test water quality Justify Provide valid reasons Justify your choice of farming method Synthesise Combine information from multiple sources Synthesise information from the passage and graph   

--- PAGE 15 ---
2.4.4 Mark Allocation Guidelines MARK RANGE EXPECTED RESPONSE LENGTH COGNITIVE LEVEL 1-2 marks 1-2 sentences or simple calculation Remembering/Understanding 3-4 marks 3-4 sentences or multi-step calculation Applying/Analysing 5-6 marks 5-6 sentences or detailed explanation Analysing/Evaluating 7+ marks Extended response or project description Evaluating/Creating  2.5 Marking Schemes and Rubrics 2.5.1 Components of a Marking Scheme A comprehensive marking scheme includes: 1. Answer - The correct response 2. Mark breakdown - How marks are allocated 3. Acceptable alternatives - Any valid alternative answers 4. Guidance for markers - Instructions for ambiguous responses 5. Points to note - Special considerations Example Marking Scheme (Mathematics): ITEM TASK ANSWER MARKS BREAKDOWN 1(a) Write in words Two hundred fifty-four thousand eight hundred 2 1 mark for correct spelling, 1 mark for structure 1(b) Place value of '5' Ten thousands 1 1 mark for correct identification 1(c) Round to nearest ten thousand 250,000 2 2 marks for correct rounding 
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<string>", line 7, in <module>
  File "C:\Users\berna\AppData\Local\Programs\Python\Python312\Lib\encodings\cp1252.py", line 19, in encode
    return codecs.charmap_encode(input,self.errors,encoding_table)[0]
           ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
UnicodeEncodeError: 'charmap' codec can't encode character '\u2229' in position 342: character maps to <undefined>
2.5.2 Rubric Design for SBA Tasks Rubrics should have four levels of performance: LEVEL DESCRIPTOR SCORE Excellent Exceeds expectations, demonstrates mastery 4 Good Meets expectations fully 3 Fair Partially meets expectations 2 Needs Improvement Below expectations 1 Example Rubric (Integer Number Line Model): CRITERIA EXCELLENT (4) GOOD (3) FAIR (2) NEEDS IMPROVEMENT (1) 
--- PAGE 16 ---
Accuracy of Scale All integers correct, equal spacing Most integers correct, minor spacing errors 
Some integers correct, uneven spacing 
Many errors, no clear scale 
Functionality Moves smoothly and accurately Moves but occasionally sticks 
Moves with difficulty Does not move 
Durability & Creativity Sturdy, creative design Sturdy, basic design Somewhat fragile Easily broken 
Demonstration Correctly shows two integer operations 
Shows one correctly Attempts but with errors No demonstration 
2.5.3 Holistic vs Analytical Scoring ASPECT HOLISTIC SCORING ANALYTICAL SCORING Applicability Short answers, simple tasks Complex tasks, essays, projects Approach Single overall score Multiple criteria scores Feedback Limited Detailed Time efficiency High Low Reliability Lower Higher when well-designed Recommendation: Use analytical scoring for SBA tasks (30% weighting) and holistic scoring for simple examination items.            
--- PAGE 17 ---
PART THREE: 
 
3.1.1 Subject Overview Mathematics is assessed as two separate subjects: ò Mathematics I: Covers Numbers, Algebra, Geometry, Trigonometry, Statistics ò Mathematics II: Covers Index Notation, Number Bases, Equations, Matrices, Variation, Mensuration, Symmetry, Probability Construct for Mathematics I: Demonstrates numerical proficiency, critical thinking, logical and spatial reasoning to solve problems in real life. Elements of Construct for Mathematics I: 1. Interprets and performs operations on numbers to make decisions (Numbers, Integers, Approximation) 2. Uses algebraic thinking to model and solve problems (Algebra, Sets, Relations & Functions) 3. Applies spatial reasoning to geometric situations (Angles, Polygons, Similarity & Congruency) 4. Interprets and analyses data to make informed decisions (Statistics, Financial Arithmetic) 3.1.2 Assessment Structure COMPONENT WEIGHT FORMAT SBA (Component 1) 30% Projects, investigations, practical tasks Final Examination (Component 2) 70% Single theory paper, no multiple choice 3.1.3 SBA Tasks - Form 1 SBA Task 1: Integer Number Line Model (Form 1, Topic 1.3 Integers) Context: A small shop owner in your community sells goods like sugar, rice, and cooking oil. He wants to track his daily profits (positive) and losses (negative). He needs a simple, reusable number line model to visually represent positive and negative integers. Task: Design and make a durable, portable integer number line model from cardboard that shows integers from -20 to +20. The model must include a movable marker to show changes in value. Materials Provided: (i) Cardboard (ii) Glue (iii) Scissors (iv) Ruler (v) Pencil (vi) Eraser (vii) Protractor Your model must: 
--- PAGE 18 ---
1. Clearly show integers from -20 to +20 with equal spacing (e.g., 1 cm per integer) 2. Include a movable marker to demonstrate addition and subtraction of integers 3. Have a label or key showing the zero point and positive/negative directions 4. Be sturdy enough for regular classroom or shop use After making the model, demonstrate: ò Start at +10, move left 15 steps (showing 10 + (-15) = -5) ò Start at -8, move right 12 steps (showing -8 + 12 = +4) Assessment Rubric: CRITERIA EXCELLENT (4) GOOD (3) FAIR (2) NEEDS IMPROVEMENT (1) Accuracy of Scale All integers correct, equal spacing Most integers correct, minor spacing errors 
Some integers correct, uneven spacing 
Many errors, no clear scale 
Functionality Moves smoothly and accurately Moves but occasionally sticks 
Moves with difficulty Does not move 
Durability & Creativity Sturdy, creative design Sturdy, basic design Somewhat fragile Easily broken 
Demonstration Correctly shows two integer operations 
Shows one correctly Attempts but with errors No demonstration 
 SBA Task 2: Venn Diagram Model (Form 1, Topic 1.4 Sets) Context: A librarian at Mukuba Secondary School in Kitwe wants to organise books in a new way. She has three categories: ò Set A: Books about Mathematics ò Set B: Books about Science ò Set C: Books with coloured covers She needs a physical Venn diagram model to sort 20 sample books. Task: Design and make a 3-set Venn diagram display board (minimum size 60cm ╫ 60cm) using the provided materials. Materials Provided: (i) Cardboard (ii) Glue (iii) Scissors (iv) Ruler (v) Pencil (vi) Eraser (vii) Coloured paper/markers Your model must: 
--- PAGE 19 ---
