
--- PDF_PAGE 36 ---
- 20 - 
 
Chapter 3: Civic Education – 3011  
1 
Construct 
Demonstrates understanding of social, economic and political development in fostering national 
development and upholding human dignity  
2 
Elements of Construct  
The Civic Education examination will be based on the following four (4) Elements of Construct 
(EoC): 
EoC 1 
Demonstrates patriotism and good citizenry 
 Demonstrates principles of patriotism, promotes social justice and good governance in real 
life situations. 
EoC 2  Utilises resources to foster personal and national development 
 Exhibit good planning skills and manages resources to foster personal, community and 
national development. 
EoC 3  Resolves conflict and Collaborates with others in local, regional and international  
affairs to promote national development.  
 Resolves real life conflicts to promote a peaceful, non-violent society and understands the 
role of International organisations in creating a culture of peace. 
 Collaborates with diverse local, regional and international organisations stake holders to drive 
national development through coordinated initiatives and partnerships.  
EoC 4 
Exhibits principles, good morals and values in day to day life  
 Integrates cultural understanding and personal responsibility to promote   integrity, combat 
corruption, foster self-control, strengthen family and legal relationships in daily life.  
3 
Test Design  
The Civic Education Examination for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level (ECSEOL) will 
have two components as follows: Component 1 will be School Based Assessment (SBA) which will be 
locally set and administered by Civic Education teachers in respective schools following the SBA 
guidelines provided by the Examinations Council of Zambia.SBA will be administered in form 2 and 3. 
Component 2 will be a theory Final Examination paper which will be centrally set by the Examinations 
Council of Zambia. This examination will be administered in form 4.  
The total marks for School Based Assessment component will be 200 marks and will contribute 30% 
towards the final Assessment. The total marks for final examination component will be 100 marks and will 
contribute 70% towards the final mark. The following table summarises the test design for the School 
Based Assessment and Final Examination: 
Summary of the Test Design for Components 1 and 2 
Subject Name 
Type of 
Assessment 
Code 
Level 
Duration 
Number of items 
Percent 
Civic Education 
School-Based 
Assessment 
(Component 1) 
3011/1 
 
Form 1 
1 year 
- 
- 
Form 2 
1 year 
5 
100 
Form 3 
1 year 
5 
100 
Form 4 
1 year 
- 
- 
Total  
 
200 
Final Examination 
(Component 2) 
3011/2 
Form 4 
2hours 30minutes 
6 
100 
Total 
 
300 

--- PDF_PAGE 37 ---
- 21 - 
 
3.1 
Test Structure 
School Based Assessment – Component 1 
 The subject will use all types of questions such as structured, semi-structured and open ended. 
These will be in form of class tests, debates, projects, group discussions, presentations, role play 
and assignments. The project will start in Form 2 and finalised in Form 3. For GCE candidates, an 
alternative paper to SBA will be developed by the teacher. Guidance will be provided by the ECZ. 
Final Examination - Component 2 
The Final Examination theory paper will consist of two sections: Section A and Section B. 
Component 2 will be based on the four elements of construct, comprising a total of six (6) items. 
Section A will cover Elements 1 and 2, each with two items. Candidates will be required to answer 
one item from each element of construct. The items in Section A must always be of the same 
level of difficulty. 
Section B will cover Elements 3 and 4, each with one item. Candidates will be required to answer 
all items in this section. 
Scenarios drawn from real-life situations will be presented in various forms such as narrations, 
maps, diagrams, graphs, charts, illustrations, tables, statistical data, pictures and combination of   
both narration and graphic or from any other relevant source. 
The Final Examination will be based on all the four Elements of Construct. The number of items 
and scenarios in each Element of Construct has been summarised in the following table: 
3.2 
Test Content 
          The test content for both Component 1 and Component 2 will be considered in terms of items types, 
level of difficulty and syllabus coverage. 
3.2.1 
 Types of Tasks and Items 
School Based Assessment- Component 1 will consist of assessment tasks that will use a 
variety of question types such as subjective questions, group work, tests, class exercises, 
research activities, debates, case study, journals, field trips, group discussions, report 
S/N 
Elements of Construct 
No. of Items 
Stimuli/Scenario 
Total Marks 
1 
Demonstrates patriotism and good 
citizenry 
2 
2 
30 
2 
Utilises resources to foster national 
development 
2 
2 
20 
3 
Resolves conflicts and Collaborates with 
others in local, regional and international 
affairs to promote national development. 
1 
1 
25 
4 
Exhibits principles, good morals and 
national values in day today life 
1 
1 
25 
 
Total 
6 
6 
100 

--- PDF_PAGE 38 ---
- 22 - 
 
writing, presentations, assignments, role play and project. The paper will consist of five (5) 
tasks and each item will carry 20 marks. 
Final Examination - Component 2 
The Final Examination will have the following types of items: 
Section A: Semi-structured items designed to test applied knowledge, reasoning, and 
interpretation. Section B: Essay tasks requiring extended responses, where candidates 
demonstrate deeper analysis, evaluation, and synthesis of ideas. 
Section A [50 Marks] 
(i) Under the Elements of Construct (EoC) 1, there are two items, namely Item 1 and Item 2. 
Each item will have one scenario with two tasks, (a) or (b). Candidates will be expected 
to answer either task (a) and (b) under Item 1, and either task (a) or (b) under Item 2. 
Each task will carry 15 marks, giving a total of 30 marks for EoC 1. 
(ii) Under the Elements of Construct (EoC) 2, there will be two items: Item 3 and Item 4. 
Each item will have one scenario with two tasks (a) and (b. 
(iii) Candidates will be expected to answer either task (a) or (b) under Item 3, and either task 
(a) or (b) under Item 4. Each task will carry 10 marks, giving a total of 20 marks for EoC 
2. 
Section B [50 Marks] 
(i) Candidates will be expected to answer all the items in this section. 
(ii) Under the Elements of Construct (EoC) 3, there will be one item, with two tasks (a) and 
(b). 
(iii) Task (a) will carry 15 marks, while task (b) will carry 10 marks, giving a total of 25 
marks for EoC 3. 
(iv) Under the Elements of Construct (EoC) 4, there is one item, with two tasks (a) and (b). 
(v) Task (a) will carry 15 marks, while task (b) will carry 10 marks, giving a total of 25 
marks for EoC 4. 
3.2.2 
Syllabus Coverage 
The Civic Education examination will be based on the 2024 Civic Education Syllabus for 
Secondary Education Ordinary Level (Form 1-4, developed by the Curriculum 
Development Centre (CDC, 2024) as well as the Test Specification and Test Framework 
developed by the Examinations Council of Zambia to ensure validity, reliability and 
comparability of the examination from year to year. 
The SBA tasks and test items for the final examination will be based on key and specific 
competences. These competences are grouped according to their similarities into Elements 
of Constructs (EoC). 
3.2.3 
Level of Difficulty 

--- PDF_PAGE 39 ---
- 23 - 
 
The level of difficulty for Civic Education School Based Assessment tasks and Final 
Examination test items will range from remembering to creating level of the revised 
Bloom‘s taxonomy.  
The difficulty of the tasks will be determined by the following factors: 
(i) Real-life situation on a given Element of Construct that the learner will be expected to 
respond to. 
(ii) Subject knowledge required to respond to the real-life and problem-solving situation 
correctly. 
(iii) Complexity or number of complex cognitive processes required to generate responses 
to questions. 
(iv) Number of questions the learner will be expected to respond to on a given stimuli 
(v) Level of knowledge, skills, values and attitudes applied to respond correctly. 
(vi) Strategies involved in responding to the items. 
4 
Scoring Criteria  
4.1  
School-Based Assessment  Component 1  
(i)       SBA will be scored at school level by the teachers of Civic Education. 
(ii) 
The various SBA tasks will contribute 100 marks per form giving a total of 200 marks. 
(iii) 
Note: ECZ will calculate the weightage. Each form (level) has SBA tasks worth 100 marks.  
4.2 
Final Examination – Component 2 
(i) 
This component will be centrally scored by examiners engaged by the Examinations Council 
of Zambia. At the beginning of the marking process, a coordination meeting will be held to 
harmonise and standardise the scoring scheme. A standard scoring scheme will be prepared 
by the Examinations Council of Zambia for each particular examination, with guidelines 
provided in the marking schemes. 
(ii) 
During the scoring exercise, team leaders will coordinate the work of the examiners to ensure 
standards are maintained. 
(iii) 
Candidates will be assessed for coherent understanding, application, analysis, evaluation and 
creation in interpreting scenarios given in tasks and real-life contexts.  
 (iv)   Extended responses should provide analysis and interpretation of real-life scenarios, applying 
acquired skills to propose solutions to existing problems.  
(v) 
The scores for each question will be indicated at the end of the item. 
(vi) 
 Marks will be awarded based on appropriate language use, sound analysis, logic flow of 
ideas and relevant application of concepts to the scenario.  
5 
Notes and Guidelines 
5.1 
School-Based Assessment-Component 1 

--- PDF_PAGE 40 ---
- 24 - 
 
(i) Candidates will be assessed using the SBA guidelines provided by the Examinations Council 
Zambia. 
(ii) All SBA tasks will be set, administered and scored by the subject teacher. 
5.2  
Final Examination – Component 2 
(i) 
All SBA marks should be marked out of 100 per year and raw marks submitted to the ECZ. 
(ii) 
Candidates must sit for both components in order to be graded. ECZ does not process partial 
scores. 
(iii) 
More marks will be allocated to analysis and evaluation levels as these denote higher order 
thinking skills.  
(iv) 
Calculators, electronic devices and unauthorised materials are not allowed in the examination 
room or during the administration of SBA 
(v) 
Text books and other reference materials are also not allowed during the examination. 
 (vi) All items will be answered in the spaces provided in the question paper. 
(vii) Extended responses should be written in paragraphs and in full sentences (not point form)   
(viii) Extended responses should contain relevant information, logical flow of ideas, and 
appropriate analysis of presented scenarios in order to score marks. 
6. 
Exemplar Test Items 
EoC1: Demonstrates patriotism and good Citizenry 
SECTION A [50 MARKS]  
(vi) 
There are two items: Item 1 and Item 2. Each item has one item with two tasks (a) or (b), each carrying 15 
marks 
(vii) 
Candidates must answer either task (a) or (b) under Item 1, and either task (a) or (b) under Item 2. Each 
chosen task carries 15 marks. Giving a total of 30 marks for EoC 1. 
Item 1 
Chalowa, a 16-year-old from Eastern Province, moves to Lusaka for school. In the city, she witnesses littering, tribal 
disputes, and tax evasion. During Zambia‘s Independence Day assembly, the flag and anthem inspired her to reflect on 
true patriotism. She joins a youth club, where debates and clean-ups taught her that citizenship means unity, 
responsibility, and action. Chalowa becomes an active patriot, educating peers on civic duties and promoting harmony in 
her diverse neighbourhood. She became a better citizen and encouraged others to be responsible citizens. 
Now do the following tasks: 
(a) 
(i)  From the scenario, how can Chalowa use the three symbols of Zambian national identity mentioned or 
implied to foster patriotism.  
 [6 marks]  
 
Model responses 
National Flag  
The Zambian flag, with its green background symbolizing vegetation and agriculture, orange stripes for mineral 
wealth, red for the struggle for freedom, black for the people, and eagle for freedom, fosters patriotism by 
reminding citizens of Zambia‘s natural resources and independence. Chalowa can use the flag in youth club 
activities to encourage pride, unity, and respect for national  
heritage. 
 [2marks] 
National Anthem 
The anthem “Stand and Sing of Zambia, Proud and Free” promotes patriotism by calling on citizens to stand 
united, honour the nation‘s history, and commit to peace and progress. Chalowa can lead the youth club in 
singing the anthem during meetings or community service events, inspiring collective responsibility and national 
pride.  
 [2 marks] 
Independence Day 
Celebrated annually on October 24, it symbolizes Zambia‘s liberation from colonial  
rule in 1964. Chalowa can organize youth club commemorations, reflecting on national heroes like Kenneth 

--- PDF_PAGE 41 ---
- 25 - 
 
Kaunda, fostering gratitude for freedom, and motivating good citizenship through service projects and cultural 
events.  
 [2 marks]   
(ii) 
Explain how patriotism can contribute to unity in Chalowa‘s community?  
 [2 marks]   
Model Responses  
Patriotism can contribute to unity in Chalowa‘s community by fostering pride in  
shared identity, reducing tribal divisions, and motivating citizens to work collectively for peace and development. 
 
 [2 marks] 
(iii) 
Using Chalowa‘s experience, explain how bad citizenship in your area can be overcome to enhance patriotism. [4 m
Model Responses 
These can be overcome through: 
 by education and community action, 
 by promoting symbols like the national anthem in youth clubs, as Chalowa did,  
 To emphasize "One Zambia, One Nation" and encourage dialogue for unity,  
 by civic campaigns on ethical duties, inspiring like Chalowa to volunteer and model integrity.  
 [4 marks] 
(iv)  
How can qualifications to Zambian citizenship encourage good citizenry among applicants like potential 
immigrants in Lusaka to solve the challenges observed in passage?  
[2 marks] 
Model Responses 
These qualifications promote good citizenry by ensuring applicants are committed to Zambia's values, such as 
unity and respect for traditions, as Chalowa observes in her neighbourhood. For instance, the residency and 
language requirements build integration, fostering patriotism through shared responsibilities like tax payment and 
anti-corruption efforts, turning immigrants into active contributors to national harmony rather than bystanders.  [2 m
Mark any other correct response. 
 
 [Total: 15 marks] 
OR 
Answer the following tasks in essay form 
b. (i) 
Explain the responsibilities of a citizen in Zambia, drawing lessons from Chalowa‘s transformation in Lusaka. 
 
 [7 marks] 
Model Responses 
A citizen is a person that belongs to a particular nation and enjoys the privileges and freedoms granted by it. 
The following are some of the responsibilities of a citizen in Zambia. 
 Respecting laws: Obeying the country's laws and regulations is essential for maintaining social order and 
stability. Good citizens understand the importance of laws in protecting individual rights and promoting 
the common good. 
 Paying taxes: Paying taxes is a critical responsibility of citizens, as it enables the government to fund 
public services and infrastructure. Tax compliance demonstrates a citizen's commitment to contributing to 
the nation's development. 
 Protecting the environment: Citizens have a duty to protect the environment and conserve natural 
resources. This includes participating in activities like clean-up campaigns, reducing waste, and promoting 
sustainable practices. 
 Promoting unity and diversity: Good citizens promote unity and harmony among different ethnic and 
cultural groups. This involves embracing diversity, respecting cultural differences, and working towards a 
cohesive society. 
 Resisting corruption: Citizens should resist and report corrupt practices, such as bribery and 
embezzlement, which undermine trust in institutions and hinder development. By standing against 
corruption, citizens promote transparency and accountability. 
 Engaging in community problem-solving: Good citizens take an active role in addressing community 
challenges and finding solutions. This might involve participating in community projects, volunteering, or 
engaging in local decision-making processes. 
(ii) 
Analyse the barriers to good citizenship in Zambia, with reference to the challenges Chalowa observed in 
Lusaka.  
 [8 marks]   
Model Responses 
Citizenship is the legal status of being a member of a country granting rights and imposing responsibilities 
within that nation forming a bond of allegiance and participation. The following are some of the barriers to 
good citizenship. 

--- PDF_PAGE 42 ---
- 26 - 
 
 Lack of civic education: Many citizens may not fully understand their rights and responsibilities due to 
inadequate civic education. This can lead to a lack of engagement in civic activities and a failure to hold 
leaders accountable. 
 Tribal conflicts and ethnic divisions: Ethnic divisions and tribal conflicts can create tension and mistrust 
among different groups, making it challenging to build a cohesive society and promote national unity. 
 Tax evasion and weak enforcement: Tax evasion deprives the government of revenue needed for public 
services, while weak enforcement undermines the fairness of the tax system. This can lead to a lack of 
trust in government and a sense of injustice. 
 Corruption: Corruption is a significant barrier to good citizenship, as it erodes trust in institutions, 
undermines the rule of law, and diverts resources away from those who need them most. 
 Limited access to civic education: Limited access to civic education can perpetuate ignorance about civic 
rights and responsibilities, making it difficult for citizens to participate fully in the democratic process. 
 Ineffective community programs: Community programs that are poorly designed or ineffective can fail 
to engage citizens and address community needs, leading to disillusionment and disengagement. 
 Socio-economic pressures promoting self-interest: Economic hardship and poverty can lead individuals 
to prioritize their own interests over the common good, making it challenging to build a sense of 
community.  
 [15 marks]   
Mark any other correct response. 
[ Total:  30: marks] 
Level of difficult: Ranges from Understanding to Evaluating   
Key competence: Citizenship 
Specific competences: Some specific competences are: Shows importance of symbols of national identity and practice 
principles of patriotism and national identity. 
 ________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Item 2 
 
Greenfield is a fast-growing town in Zambia with about 50,000 residents. The local government provides services like 
education, health, and infrastructure, while traditional leaders still hold significant influence. Recently, Greenfield faces 
challenges such as revenue shortfalls, limiting their ability to maintain roads and support services. There is increased 
pollution from new industries, and waste management systems are inefficient. Aallegations of electoral malpractice 
during elections, and residents are confused about the role of traditional leaders in governance. Some citizens feel their 
constitutional rights are not fully protected, highlighting the need for greater awareness. Several CSOs are working to 
promote good governance, human rights, and environmental sustainability but face resource constraints. 
Now do the following tasks 
a. (i) 
How can the local government in Greenfield improve its sources of revenue to better serve the community?  [2 m
Model Responses 
The local government can explore diverse revenue sources such as increasing local taxes (business, property, 
or market taxes), collecting fees for services like water and waste disposal, and applying for grants from the 
central government or international donors. Developing public-private partnerships (PPPs) can also attract 
investment. Additionally, promoting local economic activities like markets and tourism can boost revenue. 
(ii) 
What role can traditional leaders in Greenfield play in environmental conservation and local governance?  [2 ma
Model Responses 
Traditional leaders can mobilize their communities to participate in environmental conservation efforts, such 
as tree planting and waste management. They can serve as mediators between the government and residents, 
promoting adherence to laws and regulations. Traditional leaders can also advocate for sustainable use of 
natural resources and support community-based projects that align with development goals. 
(iii) 
How can elections in Greenfield be made more credible and transparent? 
 [2 marks] 
Model Responses 
To improve election credibility, the Electoral Commission should ensure impartiality, transparency, and 
fairness in the electoral process. This includes voter education, transparent voter registration, and monitoring 
by independent observers. Strict enforcement of laws against electoral malpractice, such as vote-buying and 
intimidation, is essential. Educating citizens about their voting rights and the importance of credible elections 
can also foster trust. 
(iv)  
Suggest one way how the constitution of Greenfield land protect citizens' human rights?  
[1 mark] 
Model Responses 

--- PDF_PAGE 43 ---
- 27 - 
 
 The constitution enshrines fundamental human rights such as freedom of speech, assembly, and equality 
before the law.  
 It provides legal protections that citizens can rely on if their rights are violated.  
 The Bill of Rights specifies rights related to dignity, property, and participation. When citizens are aware 
of these protections, they can demand justice and hold authorities accountable. 
(v)  
Explain how the Civil Society Organizations of Greenfield can promote good governance and human rights? [2 m
Model Responses 
CSOs raise awareness about citizens‘ rights and responsibilities, monitor government actions, and advocate 
for policy changes. They organize community programs, provide legal aid, and support vulnerable groups. For 
CSOs to be effective, they need proper registration, resources, and capacity-building to operate independently 
and influence development positively. 
 
 
(vi)  
What innovative revenue sources could Greenfield explore to reduce dependence on central government 
transfers?  
 [2 marks] 
Model responses 
Greenfield could reduce dependence on central government transfers by introducing local levies on industries, 
property taxes, and small business licenses, as well as eco-taxes on polluting industries. In addition, it could 
explore innovative sources such as user fees for public services, tourism levies, public-private partnerships, 
community bonds, and promoting local cooperatives that generate income for municipal projects. 
(vii)  
How can Greenfield ensure that rapid growth does not compromise social equity and environmental health?   [2 
Model Responses 
Greenfield can ensure rapid growth does not compromise social equity and environmental health by making 
sure industrial expansion includes job creation, affordable housing, and strict environmental safeguards. In 
addition, it should promote inclusive urban planning, invest in green infrastructure and renewable energy, 
enforce pollution controls, and ensure equitable access to social services such as healthcare and education 
(viii) 
What strategies could CSOs in Greenfield use to involve youth in governance and sustainability initiatives?  [2m
Model Responses. 
CSOs in Greenfield can involve youth in governance and sustainability by creating youth councils, 
mentorship programs, and environmental clubs, while also engaging them through training, school 
partnerships, social media campaigns, and recognition of youth-led initiatives. 
 
 [Total : 15marks] 
OR 
Answer the following tasks in essay form 
b. (i) Analyse the role of traditional leaders in Greenfield's governance system. 
Model Responses  
 [7 marks] 
 The governance system refers to the framework, processes, and institutions through which a country, 
organisation, or community manages its affairs, makes decisions, and implements policies. It encompasses the 
mechanisms by which authority is exercised, accountability is maintained, and resources are allocated to 
achieve desired outcomes 
 Custodians of Culture and Tradition: Traditional leaders, such as chiefs and headmen, serve as custodians 
of local customs, traditions, and cultural heritage. They help preserve social norms and values that influence 
community cohesion. 
 Community Dispute Resolution: They often act as mediators and arbitrators in local disputes, providing a 
customary justice system that is accessible and culturally appropriate for community members. 
 Influence on Local Decision-Making: Traditional leaders hold significant influence over community 
decisions, especially in rural or less formal settings, shaping local policies and priorities. 
 Liaison with Government Authorities: They serve as intermediaries between the community and 
government officials, facilitating communication, mobilizing community support, and assisting in the 
implementation of government programs. 
 Mobilisation and Leadership: During community events, elections, or development projects, traditional 
leaders mobilize residents, encouraging participation and fostering social unity. 
 Advisory Role in Governance: Although they do not have formal legislative power, traditional leaders often 

--- PDF_PAGE 44 ---
- 28 - 
 
provide advice and guidance to local government authorities, shaping policies that affect their communities. 
 Potential Influence on Electoral Processes: Their support can sway electoral outcomes, but this influence 
can sometimes lead to electoral malpractice or bias if not properly regulated. 
 Challenges of Role Clarity and Authority: There is often confusion about the boundaries between 
traditional authority and formal government roles, leading to overlaps, conflicts, or questions about legitimacy 
in governance. 
 Impact on Rights and Development: Traditional leaders can either facilitate or hinder development projects 
and the protection of citizens' rights depending on their understanding of governance and community needs. 
 Need for Formal Integration: To maximize their positive impact, traditional leaders require clear roles 
within the formal governance framework, capacity building, and recognition of their influence while 
respecting constitutional governance principles 
(ii)  
Describes the role that Electoral Commission of Greenfield play in eradicating allegations of electoral 
malpractice.  
Model Responses 
 Ensuring Transparent Voter Registration Processes: The Electoral Commission of Greenfield is 
responsible for establishing and maintaining a transparent and accurate voter registration system. By using 
secure registration methods, verifying voter identities, and preventing duplicate registrations, they reduce 
opportunities for electoral fraud and ensure that only eligible voters participate. 
 Supervising and Managing the Electoral Process: The commission oversees every stage of the election, 
from candidate nomination to the casting and counting of votes. They ensure that the process adheres to 
established electoral laws and standards, which helps prevent manipulation, vote rigging, or any irregularities. 
 Monitoring Campaign Activities and Political Advertising: To prevent unfair practices, the commission 
regulates campaign activities, ensuring that all candidates and political parties follow rules related to 
campaign financing, advertising, and rallies. This oversight discourages vote-buying, intimidation, and 
misinformation that could compromise the integrity of elections. 
 Deploying Electoral Observers and Stakeholders: The commission often invites independent observers, 
political parties, and civil society organizations to monitor the election process. Their presence acts as a 
deterrent against malpractice, and their reports help identify and address irregularities promptly. 
 Implementing Secure Voting and Ballot Counting Systems:  The Electoral Commission of Greenfield 
ensures that voting methods are secure, such as using tamper-proof ballots or electronic voting systems where 
applicable. Transparent and verifiable ballot counting procedures help prevent ballot stuffing, vote tampering, 
or miscounting. 
 Investigating and Handling Electoral Complaints and Disputes: The commission has a dedicated 
department to receive, investigate, and resolve complaints related to electoral malpractice. Prompt action 
against violations, including disqualification of candidates or invalidation of votes if necessary, helps uphold 
election integrity. 
 Public Education and Awareness Campaigns: The commission conducts voter education programs to 
inform citizens about their rights, the importance of voting, and how to detect and report irregularities. An 
informed electorate is less likely to fall prey to malpractice or manipulation. 
 Enforcing Electoral Laws and Sanctions: The Electoral Commission enforces laws related to electoral 
conduct. When violations occur, they have the authority to impose sanctions, fines, or disqualifications, 
thereby discouraging malpractice and reinforcing accountability. 
 Use of Technology and Data Management: The commission leverages technology for voter registration, 
results transmission, and data management to enhance transparency and reduce human errors or 
manipulations. 
 Building Public Confidence in Electoral Processes: By maintaining transparency, fairness, and impartiality, 
the Electoral Commission fosters public trust in elections. This confidence is crucial for reducing suspicion 
and allegations of malpractice.     
 
 
[8 marks] 
 
                                                                                                                    [Total :30 marks 
Level of difficult: Range from Remembering to Evaluating   
 
Key competence: Some of the key competences are: Citizenship, Environmental sustainability, Analytical   thinking and 
collaboration 
Specific competence: The following are some of the specific competences: Examine the functions of Local Government, 
demonstrate understanding of the role of traditional rulers in the governance of the country, analyse the role of the 

--- PDF_PAGE 45 ---
- 29 - 
 
electoral Commission of Zambia 
 
Example from EoC 2 Utilises resources to foster national development 
 
There are two items; Item 3 and Item 4. Each item has one scenario k with two tasks (a) and (b), each 
carrying 10 marks. 
 
Answer either task (a) or (b) under Item 3, and either task (a) or (b) under Item 4. Each task carries 10 marks, 
giving a total of 20 marks for EoC 2. 
Item 3 
The Government of Zambia has launched a National Development Project aimed at improving infrastructure, 
education, and healthcare. To finance this project, Zambia considers borrowing from international institutions, 
encouraging local investments, and strengthening tax compliance. At the same time, commercial banks, the Zambia 
Revenue Authority (ZRA), and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) play critical roles in mobilizing 
resources. However, challenges such as debt crisis, poverty, and trade imbalances remain pressing issues. 
Tasks 3. 
a. (i) Describe two types of loans Zambia can obtain to finance the national development project in order to improve 
infrastructure, education sector, and healthcare mentioned in the passage.  
 [4 marks] 
Model Responses  
 Soft loans: These are concessional loans offered by international institutions or governments at very low or 
zero interest, with long repayment periods and grace periods. They are mainly used to finance social 
development projects like schools, hospitals, and basic infrastructure, making them affordable for countries 
such as Zambia 
 Hard loans: These are commercial loans from banks or capital markets given at market interest rates with 
shorter repayment terms and little or no grace period. They are best suited for revenue-generating projects like 
toll roads or energy plants, but they carry higher risks due to heavier debt servicing and foreign exchange 
exposure. 
(i)  
Evaluate two types of investments the government can use to address the national development described in the 
passage.   
 [4 marks]  
Model Responses  
 Public Investments: These are investments made by the government using public funds (mainly tax revenue, 
grants, or borrowed money). Public investments aim to improve social welfare, create jobs, and provide 
essential services that foster national development. Examples of public investment includes: Building 
roads, bridges and railways, public schools and universities, hospitals and healthcare facilities and energy and 
water supply systems. 
 Private Investments: These are investments made by individuals, companies, or private organizations using 
their own capital. Private investments stimulate economic growth by creating employment, increasing 
production, and contributing to government revenue through taxes. Examples for private investments are 
buying company shares (stocks), investing in private businesses or start-ups, trust funds, lending out money, 
treasury bills, real estate purchases for rental income, venture capital and private equity.  
 [4 marks] 
(iii)  
How can tax compliance help the government to finance the national project mentioned in the passage.   [2 marks] 
Model Responses. 
Tax compliance ensures that the government collects enough revenue to fund national development projects and 
provide essential public services. It also broadens the tax base, reduces reliance on external borrowing, and 
promotes fairness by making sure all citizens and businesses contribute to infrastructure, education, and 
healthcare improvements. 
 [ 10 mark
Answer the following task in essay form 
b (i)  Briefly explain how Zambia can manage the debt crisis mentioned in the scenario.  
 [10 marks] 
Model Responses  
Debt management refers to the planning and execution of borrowing, repayment, and monitoring of debt so 
that obligations can be met without undermining long-term financial goals. It is about balancing the need for 
funds with the ability to repay them responsible. Effective debt management in Zambia can be achieved through: 
 Restructuring Debt to Reduce Repayment Burdens: Restructuring debt means renegotiating the terms of 
existing loans to make them more manageable. For Zambia, this could involve extending repayment periods, 
lowering interest rates, or consolidating multiple loans into one with better terms. By doing so, the 

--- PDF_PAGE 46 ---
- 30 - 
 
government can ease the immediate pressure on its budget, freeing up resources to invest in development 
projects such as infrastructure, healthcare, and education. Debt restructuring also helps avoid default and 
builds confidence among international lenders. 
 Diversifying Sources of Revenue to Avoid Over-Reliance on Borrowing: Instead of depending heavily on 
loans, Zambia can strengthen its domestic revenue base. This includes improving tax collection systems, 
introducing new levies on industries, and promoting sectors like tourism, agriculture, and mining to generate 
income. By diversifying revenue sources, the government reduces the need to borrow excessively and ensures 
a steady flow of funds to finance national development projects. This approach also makes the economy more 
resilient to external shocks. 
 Promoting Investments to Generate Income for Repayment: Encouraging both local and foreign 
investments can create new streams of revenue for Zambia. Investments in industries such as renewable 
energy, manufacturing, and agriculture not only generate jobs but also increase tax revenues and export 
earnings. These funds can then be used to repay loans more sustainably. Public-private partnerships (PPPs) 
are another way to attract investment while sharing the financial burden of large projects. 
 Enhancing Fiscal Discipline by Reducing Unnecessary Expenditure: Fiscal discipline means managing 
government spending carefully to avoid waste. Zambia can achieve this by cutting down on non-essential 
expenditures, improving efficiency in public service delivery, and prioritizing projects that have the greatest 
impact on development. By ensuring that borrowed funds are used productively, the government avoids piling 
up debt that does not contribute to growth. Strong fiscal discipline also reassures lenders and investors that 
Zambia is committed to responsible financial management. 
 
 Strengthening Debt Transparency and Reporting:  Transparent debt management involves openly 
publishing information about borrowing, repayment schedules, and debt sustainability analyses. This helps 
build trust with citizens, investors, and international partners. For Zambia, clear reporting ensures 
accountability and allows policymakers to make informed decisions about future borrowing. Transparency 
also reduces the risk of hidden debts that could lead to crises. 
 Adopting Prudent Borrowing Policies: Prudent borrowing means prioritizing concessional loans (soft 
loans) with favourable terms over expensive commercial loans. Zambia should borrow only for projects that 
generate long-term benefits, such as infrastructure, education, and healthcare, rather than for short-term 
consumption. This ensures that debt contributes to development rather than becoming a burden. 
 Boosting Tax Compliance to Increase Domestic Revenue: Improving tax compliance ensures that all 
citizens and businesses contribute fairly to national development. Stronger compliance broadens the tax base, 
reduces reliance on external borrowing, and provides steady funding for infrastructure, healthcare, and 
education. For Zambia, this means modernizing tax systems, reducing evasion, and promoting awareness 
about the importance of paying taxes. 
 Building Foreign Exchange Reserves and Encouraging Export Growth: Foreign exchange reserves act as 
a buffer for debt repayment, especially when loans are denominated in foreign currencies. Zambia can 
strengthen reserves by promoting exports of copper, agricultural products, and manufactured goods. Export 
growth increases foreign currency earnings, making it easier to service external debt and reducing 
vulnerability to currency fluctuations  
Mark any other correct response            Total:20 MARKS 
Level of difficult: Understanding to Analysing.    
Key competence: Financial Education 
Specific competence: Interpret terms of conditions of borrowing, practice good financial management and apply 
knowledge of investment in real life 
  _______________________________________________________________________________________________     
Item 4  
The Republic of Maliba, though rich in fertile land and minerals, remains underdeveloped. Citizens struggle with unmet 
human needs such as clean water, healthcare, education, and jobs, while poverty and rapid population growth strain 
resources. Production is weak due to poor infrastructure, low technology use, limited skills, and political instability. 
Agriculture is unreliable, worsened by traditional methods and climate change. Standards in goods and services are 
poorly enforced, limiting exports and eroding consumer trust. The informal sector employs many but contributes little to 
national development because of its small scale, lack of regulation, and poor access to credit. Trade is also problematic: 
locally, weak transport and markets hinder distribution; internationally, Maliba relies on exporting raw materials and 
importing costly finished goods. This imbalance has created bad terms of trade, leaving the country with little foreign 
exchange, persistent deficits, and difficulty financing development projects. 
Now do the following tasks 

--- PDF_PAGE 47 ---
- 31 - 
 
a. (i) Citizens in Maliba lack clean water, healthcare, and education. Explain how these unmet human needs affect 
Mahiba‘s national development.  
 [2 marks] 
Model response:  
Unmet human needs reduce productivity, increase poverty, and limit social progress. Without healthcare, 
education, and jobs, Maliba cannot build a skilled workforce or achieve sustainable growth. 
(ii) Maliba‘s production is weak and low. Describe two factors that affects production in Maliba. 
[4marks] 
Model response 
 Poor Infrastructure (roads, electricity, ICT): Weak infrastructure limits the movement of goods and services, 
increases transport costs, and reduces access to markets. Unreliable electricity supply hampers industrial 
growth and productivity, while poor ICT connectivity restricts innovation, communication, and access to 
modern business practices. 
 Limited Skills and Education Among the Workforce: A poorly educated workforce struggles to adopt modern 
technologies and efficient production methods. Low skill levels reduce productivity, innovation, and 
competitiveness, making it difficult for Maliba to diversify its economy or attract investment in advanced 
industries. 
 Political Instability and Reliance on Traditional Farming Methods: Frequent political unrest discourages 
investment and disrupts economic activities. At the same time, dependence on outdated farming techniques 
leads to low agricultural yields, food insecurity, and limited export potential. Without modernization, 
production remains inefficient and vulnerable to climate change    
(iii)  Goods in Maliba often fail to meet international quality requirements. How can standards of production help 
Maliba to meet international quality requirements?  
  [2 marks] 
Model Answer  
Standards ensure products are safe, reliable, and competitive. In Maliba, enforcing production standards would 
improve exports, build consumer trust, and support industrial growth. They also help producers adopt modern 
technologies, reduce waste, and meet international certifications, making Maliba‘s goods more acceptable in global 
markets. By ensuring consistency and quality, standards protect consumers, attract foreign investment, and 
strengthen the country‘s reputation in trade 
(iv)  The informal sector employs many but contributes little to Maliba‘s development. Describe  
how the informal sector can help in Maliba‘s national development if it is well financed and regulated.  [2 marks] 
Model Answer 
The informal sector employs a large portion of Maliba‘s population, but its contribution to national development 
remains limited due to lack of financing and regulation. If well financed and regulated, the informal sector could 
become a powerful driver of economic growth. Access to affordable credit and microfinance would enable small 
traders, artisans, and farmers to expand their businesses, invest in better tools, and improve productivity. 
Regulation would help integrate informal businesses into the formal economy, ensuring they pay taxes, comply 
with standards, and benefit from government support programs 
(v)  Maliba faces trade deficits due to bad terms of trade. Suggest two challenges Maliba faces in local and 
international trade.   
 [2marks] 
Model Answer 
 Locally: weak transport networks and poor market systems. 
 Internationally: reliance on raw exports, high import costs, and unfavourable trade agreements. 
(vi)  How can Mahiba‘s development plans address the challenge of limited infrastructure to support local and 
international trade?    
 [2 marks] 
Model Answer 
The plans include investing in transportation networks, energy, and communication infrastructure to facilitate 
trade, reduce costs, and improve access to markets, both domestically and internationally. 
(vii)  Given the challenges faced in international trade, explain how can Mahiba improve its trade relations to support 
national development? 
 [2 marks] 
Model Answer 
Mahiba can negotiate trade agreements, improve customs procedures, and enhance product quality standards to 
access new markets, attract investment, and increase exports, thereby supporting economic growth.  
 
 [Total: 10 Marks] 
Answer the following in essay form  
b. (i)  
Briefly describe the importance of local and international trade to Mahiba‘s economic stability and growth. 

--- PDF_PAGE 48 ---
- 32 - 
 
 
[10marks] 
Model answers  
 Local Trade: Local trade refers to the buying and selling of goods and services within a specific country or 
community. It involves transactions between local producers, businesses, and consumers. The primary aim of 
local trade is to meet the needs of people within the same geographic area, promoting economic activity and 
growth at the national or community level. 
 International Trade: International trade involves the exchange of goods and services between different 
countries. It allows countries to export products they produce efficiently and import goods they need but do not 
produce domestically. International trade helps nations access a wider variety of goods, expand markets for 
their exports, and benefit from global economic integration. The following is the importance of local and 
international to Mahiba‘s economic stability and growth. 
 Enhances Economic Diversification: Local and international trade allows Mahiba to diversify its economy by 
engaging in various sectors such as agriculture, manufacturing, and services, reducing dependence on a single 
industry and increasing resilience to economic shocks. 
 Increases Employment Opportunities: Trade activities create numerous jobs across different sectors, from 
production to logistics and retail, which helps reduce unemployment and improves living standards in Mahiba. 
 Access to Broader Markets: International trade opens up larger markets for Mahiba‘s goods and services, 
enabling local producers to expand their sales beyond domestic borders, leading to increased revenue and 
economic growth. 
 Facilitates Technology and Knowledge Transfer: Engaging in international trade exposes Mahiba to new 
technologies, practices, and innovations, which can enhance productivity and competitiveness of local 
industries. 
 
 Promotes Price Stability and Consumer Choice: Trade helps stabilize prices by balancing supply and 
demand, and provides consumers with a wider variety of goods and services, boosting consumer welfare and 
satisfaction. 
 Boosts Foreign Exchange Earnings: International trade brings in foreign currency, which is vital for paying 
for imports, servicing external debt, and maintaining currency stability. 
 Encourages Foreign Investment: A strong trade environment attracts foreign investors looking to capitalize 
on Mahiba‘s export opportunities, leading to increased capital inflows and economic development. 
 Improves Balance of Payments: Trade activities help balance Mahiba‘s payments with the rest of the world, 
reducing reliance on external borrowing and fostering financial stability. 
 Supports Infrastructure Development: Trade necessitates the development of transport, communication, and 
logistics infrastructure, which benefits the broader economy by improving efficiency and connectivity. 
 Strengthens Diplomatic and Economic Relations:  Active participation in international trade fosters good 
relations with other countries, opening avenues for cooperation, aid, and favourable trade agreements. 
 Encourages Entrepreneurial Growth: Trade incentivizes entrepreneurs to innovate and expand their 
businesses to meet both local and international demands, fostering a dynamic and competitive economy. 
 Helps Stabilise Prices During Crises: Trade can mitigate the impact of local shortages or price hikes by 
importing goods, ensuring stability and availability of essential commodities. 
 Supports Sustainable Development: Trade can promote environmentally sustainable practices by encouraging 
the adoption of global standards and innovations in resource management.          [Total: 20 marks] 
Level of difficult: Range from Understanding to Analysing   
Key competence: Some of the key competences are: Problem solving, Environmental sustainability and collaboration.  
Specific competence: Some of the specific competence are: Differentiate between local and international trade, 
demonstrate understanding of the role of informal sector to national development and Devise solutions in dealing with 
life challenges. 
 
SECTION B: COMPULSORY [50 MARKS]  
Answer all the items in this section. 
The total marks for each task is 25. Task (a) carries 15 marks and (b) carries 10 marks. 

--- PDF_PAGE 49 ---
- 33 - 
 
Example from EoC 3 Resolves conflict and Collaborates with others in local, regional and international affairs to 
promote national development. 
Item 5 
Study the following chart and answer the tasks that follow.   
 
 
Now do the following tasks:  
a. (i)  How can any of the three Specialised International Agencies on the pie chart help Zambia to solve her social and 
financial challenges?  
 [6 marks] 
Model Answers: 
 International Monetary Fund (IMF): The IMF can support Zambia by providing financial assistance and 
policy advice to stabilize the economy. Through the Extended Credit Facility, Zambia has received over US$1.3 
billion to restore debt sustainability, strengthen fiscal discipline, and promote inclusive growth. This helps 
Zambia manage debt, control inflation, and create conditions for investment. 
 United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP): UNEP may help Zambia to protect its environment and 
adapt to climate change. Projects include ecosystem-based adaptation in wetlands and forests, rehabilitating 
over 11,600 hectares and benefiting more than 50,000 people. UNEP also supports Zambia in carbon credit 
trading agreements, enabling financing for green projects. 
 World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF): WWF Zambia works to conserve wildlife, rivers, forests, and 
ecosystems. It promotes nature-based climate solutions that empower communities and improve resilience. 
WWF also advocates for sustainable agriculture, renewable energy, and youth involvement in conservation, 
ensuring Zambia‘s natural resources support food security and livelihoods. 
 World Health Organization (WHO): WHO can partner with Zambia to strengthen its healthcare system. The 
Zambia Country Cooperation Strategy (2024–2027) focuses on universal health coverage, disease prevention, 
and access to affordable healthcare. WHO supports Zambia in tackling malaria, HIV/AIDS, maternal health 
challenges, and building resilience against pandemics. 
 Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS: UNAIDS: can help Zambia fight HIV/AIDS by 

--- PDF_PAGE 50 ---
- 34 - 
 
coordinating prevention, treatment, and awareness programs. It supports initiatives like Education Plus, which 
empowers girls through education to reduce HIV risks. UNAIDS also works with Zambia to sustain its national 
AIDS response despite funding challenges. 
 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization: UNESCO can support Zambia in 
education, culture, and science. It helps safeguard World Heritage Sites and intangible cultural heritage. 
Through the Zambia National Commission for UNESCO, it promotes quality education, scientific research, and 
cultural preservation, strengthening Zambia‘s identity and global visibility. 
 United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund. UNICEF focuses on child welfare and protection 
in Zambia. Nearly half of Zambia‘s population is under 15, and UNICEF provides support in healthcare, 
nutrition, education, and climate resilience. It addresses child poverty, malnutrition, and access to clean water, 
ensuring children grow up healthy and safe. 
 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP): UNDP helps Zambia build a resilient and diversified 
economy. It supports digital transformation in healthcare, green transition initiatives, and climate financing. 
UNDP also works on poverty reduction, governance reforms, and refugee community support, ensuring 
inclusive and sustainable development. 
(ii)  
How does collaboration with international organisations, such as those shown on the pie chart help Zambia address 
local, regional, and global issues?  
 [6 marks] 
Model answers  
 Local issues:  Specialised agencies supports Zambia in their specialised area of concern e.g. WHO supports 
Zambia in controlling malaria and HIV/AIDS through health campaigns. 
 Regional issues: SADC promotes trade agreements and infrastructure development across Southern Africa. 
 Global issues: The UN and World Bank provide funding and technical support for climate resilience and 
poverty reduction.  
(iii)  Explain how Zambia‘s membership with African regional organisations on the pie chart help to promote regional 
development and cooperation.   
 [3 marks] 
Model Answer  
 Zambia‘s membership in organizations such as the African Union (AU) promotes regional development b 
encouraging economic integration, peacekeeping, and trade cooperation. It also enhances cross-border 
infrastructure projects and fosters collective responses to regional challenges like health crises and climate 
change. 
 Zambia collaborates through Southern African Development Community) SADC to strengthen governance, 
improve infrastructure, and enhance social services.  
[Total:15 marks]  
Answer the following in essay form  
b. Briefly discuss the methods the United Nations can use in promoting peace using the regional organisations in Africa 
shown on the chart.  
 [10 marks ]  
Model Answer  
 Peacekeeping operations: Deploying UN peacekeepers to protect civilians, monitor ceasefires, and support 

--- PDF_PAGE 51 ---
- 35 - 
 
humanitarian aid in conflict zones. 
 Partnership with the African Union: Strengthening collaboration with AU-led missions, supported by UN funding 
and logistics, to ensure African leadership in peace efforts. 
 Mediation and diplomacy: Facilitating dialogue between warring parties, supporting peace agreements, and 
encouraging inclusive governance. 
 Post-conflict peace building: Supporting reconstruction, reconciliation, and institution-building to prevent relapse into 
conflict. 
 Economic and social development programs: Addressing root causes of conflict such as poverty, unemployment, 
and inequality through sustainable development initiatives. 
 Capacity building: Training local security forces, judiciary, and civil society groups to strengthen governance and rule 
of law. 
 Humanitarian assistance: Providing aid to displaced populations and ensuring access to food, healthcare, and 
education in conflict-affected regions.  
 [25 marks] 
 
Level of difficult:  Ranges from Remembering to Applying 
Key competence: Collaboration, problem solving, Emotional intelligence  
Specific Competence: Demonstrates understanding of the specialised Agencies of the United Nations Organisation.   
 
 
Example from EoC 4 Exhibit principles, goods morals and values in day to day life 
Item 6 
Zambia is facing multiple social challenges that affect moral values and national development. Issues such as corruption 
in schools and homes, substance abuse among youth, child abuse, teenage pregnancies, gender-based violence, and 
family crises are prevalent. The government, schools, families, and institutions are working together to address these 
problems through policies, awareness campaigns, and enforcement of laws. 
Study the following bar chart showing the prevalence of selected social issues in Zambia. 

--- PDF_PAGE 52 ---
- 36 - 
 
   
         
Do the following tasks: 
a. (i) According to the bar chart, which social issue is most prevalent in Zambia‘s schools and homes?  
 [1 mark] 
Model Answers: 
 
Substance (75%). 
(ii) Explain two forms of corruption that could have led to the 15.3% prevalence shown in the chart.  
  [2 marks] 
Model Answers: 
 
Petty corruption (small bribes, exam cheating). 
 
Grand corruption (embezzlement of large sums). 
 
Political corruption (misuse of public office). 
(iii) Explain two effects of the forms of   corruption on national development identified in (b). 
                                                                                                                                            [4 marks] 
Model Answers: 
 
Reduced Investor Confidence-When corruption and instability are high, investors fear losing money. 
They hesitate to fund projects, leading to fewer jobs and slower economic growth. 
 
Poor Service Delivery-Public funds are diverted or misused. Essential services like healthcare, 
education, and infrastructure suffer, leaving citizens underserved. 
 
Misallocation of Resources -Money meant for development is spent on personal gain or unnecessary 
projects. This prevents resources from reaching critical areas such as schools, hospitals, and roads. 
 
Erosion of Public Trust -Citizens lose faith in leaders and institutions when corruption and inefficiency 
persist. This weakens cooperation between the public and government, making reforms harder to 
implement.  
[Any two] 
(iv) Suggest four methods the community can use to reduce the problem identified in (a).  
 [4 marks] 
Model Answers: 
 Education and Awareness Campaigns: School-based programs to teach young people about the dangers 
of drugs and alcohol, sensitization through radio, TV, and social media to reach wider audiences. 
 Policy and Legal Enforcement: Strengthening the Drug Enforcement Commission (DEC) to crack down 
on trafficking and illegal sales. Enforcing stricter penalties for suppliers while focusing on rehabilitation 
for users. 
 Rehabilitation and Health Services. Expanding rehabilitation centres and counselling services for 
addicts. Integrating substance abuse treatment into primary healthcare to make services more accessible. 
 Community and Family Engagement: Mobilizing community leaders, churches, and NGOs to support 
prevention and recovery efforts. Encouraging family involvement in rehabilitation to provide emotional 
and social support. 
 Youth Empowerment and Alternatives: Expanding sports, arts, and vocational training programs to 

--- PDF_PAGE 53 ---
- 37 - 
 
keep young people engaged in positive activities. 
 Partnerships and Multi-Sectoral Approach: Collaboration between government, NGOs, schools, health 
institutions, and international partners. Sharing resources and expertise to strengthen prevention, 
treatment, and enforcement. 
(v) Explain one effect of the social challenge at 75% prevalence rate on the chart.  
 [2 marks]  
Model Answers: 
 Increased Crime Rates -When people engage in substance abuse or corruption, they often resort to 
illegal activities to sustain their habits or lifestyles for example drug trafficking, theft, burglary, and 
violent crimes increase in communities where substance abuse is high. This undermines public safety and 
creates fear among citizens, weakening trust in law enforcement. 
 Family Breakdown - Social issues such as gender-based violence, substance abuse, and teenage 
pregnancies strain family relationships for example domestic violence, neglect of children, and divorce are 
common outcomes. Children grow up in unstable homes, leading to emotional trauma and poor academic 
performance. 
 Reduced Productivity - Substance abuse and corruption reduce the efficiency of individuals and 
institutions for example Workers under the influence of drugs or alcohol cannot perform effectively; 
corruption diverts resources away from development projects. National economic growth slows down, 
unemployment rises, and poverty deepens. 
 Spread of Diseases - Substance abuse and risky behaviours increase vulnerability to communicable 
diseases. Sharing needles among drug users spreads HIV/AIDS and hepatitis; teenage pregnancies may 
lead to maternal health complications. The healthcare system becomes overburdened, and life expectancy 
decreases.   
[Any one] 
(vi) Explain two ways of how the rate of teenage pregnancy shown on the graph can be reduced.                         [2 mark] 
 
Strengthening Sex Education in Schools- Comprehensive sex education equips young people with 
knowledge about reproductive health, contraception, and the consequences of early pregnancies. Helps 
learners make informed decisions, reduces peer pressure influence, and delays early sexual activity. 
 
Empowering Girls through Education and Community Programs- Keeping girls in school and 
providing mentorship programs reduces vulnerability to early marriages and pregnancies. Educated girls 
are more likely to focus on career goals, resist harmful traditional practices, and avoid teenage 
pregnancies.  
 [15 marks]  
Answer the task in essay form 
b.  Briefly explain how the 15.3% rate of corruption shown on the bar chart undermines moral values in schools and 
homes contributes to challenges in national development.  
 [10marks] 
Model answer 
Corruption is the abuse of entrusted power for personal or private gain. It occurs when individuals or 
institutions misuse authority, resources, or influence for dishonest benefits, undermining fairness and trust in 
society.  
Corruption in schools and homes undermines moral values by teaching children and communities that 
dishonesty, favouritism, and misuse of resources are acceptable. This weakens the ethical foundation of society 
and directly slows down national development because resources are wasted, trust is broken, and progress is 
stalled. 
 Impact on moral values: Students learn that success can be bought rather than earned, eroding honesty, 
fairness, and merit. 
 Impact on national development: Produces an incompetent workforce, reduces innovation, and weakens 
productivity in the economy. 
 Impact on moral values: Parents or administrators who embezzle money set a poor example, normalizing 
dishonesty. 
 Impact on national development: Funds meant for education, healthcare, or infrastructure are diverted, 
leading to poor service delivery and widening inequality. 
Additional Effects of Corruption 
 Erosion of Public Trust: Citizens lose confidence in leaders, schools, and institutions, making reforms 
harder to implement. 

--- PDF_PAGE 54 ---
- 38 - 
 
 Misallocation of Resources: Money meant for development projects is wasted on personal gain, leaving 
schools, hospitals, and roads underfunded. 
 Reduced Investor Confidence: Foreign and local investors hesitate to fund projects in corrupt environments, 
slowing job creation and economic growth. 
 Weakening of Rule of Law: When corruption is tolerated, laws are applied unfairly, encouraging impunity 
and undermining justice. 
 Generational Impact: Children exposed to corruption grow up believing dishonesty is normal, perpetuating 
the cycle into future generations.  
[15 marks] 
                                                                                                                                                                [Total:25 marks] 
_________________________________________________________________________________________________    
Level of difficult: Range from Understanding to Evaluating   
Key competence: Some of the key compences are: Citizenship, Analytical and Critical thinking, Communication and 
Emotional Intelligence 
Specific Competence: Take responsibility for one‟s action and inaction 
 
 
