
--- PDF_PAGE 18 ---
- 2 - 
 
Chapter 1: English Language – 1021  
 
1 
Construct 
Demonstrates proficient and competent use of the four language skills (speaking, listening, reading and 
writing) in real life situations adapting to audience and purpose in order to communicate effectively and 
support life-long learning.  
2 
Elements of Construct  
The English Language examination will be based on the following four (4) Elements of Construct (EoC): 
EoC 1   Interprets and understands spoken information 
 Identifies main ideas and supporting details 
 Analyses speaker‘s purpose, tone and intent 
 Follows instructions, directions and questions and responds appropriately 
EoC 2 
Produces ideas, thoughts and opinions through spoken language 
 Organises thoughts and ideas logically 
 Speaks clearly and audibly 
 Uses appropriate vocabulary, expressions and tone for various purposes and actions 
EoC 3 
Reads, Interprets and summarises continuous and non-continuous texts         
 Reads and understands various types of texts 
 Understands and uses words accurately and effectively, considering content, audience and 
purpose 
 Summarises main ideas and key points from a text 
EoC 4  Demonstrates masterly of written language conventions 
 Spells words correctly with orthographic accuracy 
 Applies grammatical rules in sentence construction 
 Punctuates different types of sentence to convey meaning and clarity 
 Produces coherent, purposeful, and grammatically accurate written texts. 
3 
Test Design 
The English Language Examination for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level (ECSEOL) 
will consist of two components. School Based Assessment (SBA) will be Component 1 and the Final 
Examination will be Component 2. Component 1 will be set and scored at school level in Form 2 and 3 
while Component 2 will be centrally set and marked by the Examinations Council of Zambia at the end of 
Form 4. The weighting for the School Based Assessment and Final Examination will be 30:70 
respectively. 
The following is the Test Design for the English Language examination: 
 
 
Component Name 
Code 
Duration 
Level 
Number of Tests 
Items/Tasks 
Mark 
Allocation 
School Based 
Assessment 
1012/1 
2 years 
 
Form 2 
6 
100 
Form 3 
6 
100 
Final Examination  
1012/2 
2 hour 30 minutes 
Form 4 
4 
100 
Total 
300 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 19 ---
- 3 - 
 
3.1. 
Structure 
3.1.1. 
School Based Assessment 
School Based Assessment will be the based on all the four Elements of Construct which 
focus on the four language skills. The structure of the SBA tasks will be determined by the 
subject teacher with guidance from the details outlined in the School Based assessment 
Guidelines for the Examination for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level 
(2026) produced by the Examinations Council of Zambia. 
Types of Tasks 
All SBA tasks will be based on all the 4 Elements of Construct which incorporate the four 
language skills. It will consist of the actual use of language in role plays, debates, what 
would you say, group discussions, class tests and individual and group assignments 
 
3.1.2. 
Final Examination 
The final examination will consist of three sections; A, B and C. These sections will be 
based on three out of the four Elements of Construct namely EoC 3: Reads, interprets and 
summarises continuous and non-continuous texts and EoC 4: Demonstrates masterly of 
written language conventions. EoC 4 will be assessed in two parts under Section A and C. 
Types of Items 
The paper will consist of three (3) sections; A, B and C. 
Section A: Structure - 20 marks 
EoC 4: Demonstrates masterly of written language conventions (Structure - 20 marks) 
Scenarios will be used to test the application of grammatical rules and concepts in context 
to convey meaning and purpose.   
Section B: Comprehension and Summary -50 marks 
EoC 3: Reads, Interprets and summarises continuous and non-continuous texts  
Item 1: Comprehension - 30 marks 
Item 1 will contain a scenario presented in a passage and 10 tasks. The tasks will comprise 
of open questions, sequencing and ordering, summarising tasks, application questions, true 
or false with justification, error sporting etc. 
Item 2: Summary - 20 marks  
A passage will be selected to test Summary. This passage will act as a scenario and it will 
be followed by a question on prose summary. 
Section C: Composition - 30 marks 
EoC 4: Demonstrates masterly of written language conventions Composition - 30 marks 
This section will test any type of composition. Candidates will be given two items to 
choose from. The composition will be either guided or unguided. The composition item 
may be based on the comprehension passage or any other independent scenario. 
3.2  
Test Content 
Component 1 - School Based Assessment (SBA) 
SBA will be conducted at Forms 2 and 3 comprising a variety of assessment tasks. Each year, the 
SBA will be conducted out of 100 and the scores submitted to the ECZ. For more details refer to 
School Based Assessment Guidelines for Examination for Certificate of Secondary Education 
Ordinary Level. 

--- PDF_PAGE 20 ---
- 4 - 
 
Component 2 - Final Examination (FE) 
The Final Examination will be conducted at the end of Form 4. It will consist of one paper with 
three sections. The test items in the three sections will be based on the following two Elements of 
Construct: 
(i)  
(EoC 3): Reads, Interprets and summarises continuous and non-continuous text; and 
(ii) 
(EoC 4): Demonstrates masterly of written language conventions 
Section A will focus on EoC 4, Section B on EoC 3and Section C on EoC 4.  
 
Section A: Demonstrates masterly of written language conventions (Structure - 20 marks) 
Scenarios will be used to come up with items that will test language structures. A variety of 
structures will be tested from year to year. 
 
Section B: Reads, interprets and summarises continuous and non-continuous text (Reading 
Comprehension and Summary – 50 marks) 
Item 1:  Reading Comprehension – 30 marks 
Candidates will be expected to read a given text with understanding and answer follow-up tasks. 
There will be a variety of tasks such as open ended or semi-structured test items. 
Item 2:  Summary - 20 marks  
In this item, candidates will be expected to write a summary based on a selected passage. The 
answer provided will be expected to be in prose or table form.  The prose summary should be 
written within the word limit specified. Information presented in tables should be clear and easy to 
follow. 
The length of the passages for comprehension and summary will range from 450 to 700 words. 
Section C: Demonstrates masterly of written language conventions (Composition-30 marks) 
This section will test any type of composition. Candidates will be given two items to choose from. 
Candidates will be expected to write a continuous piece of writing in accordance with the 
instructions. Each year, the type of composition/essay to be assessed will be randomly selected. The 
two compositions items will be guided and unguided selected from topics such as:  
(i) 
Narrative  
(ii) 
Descriptive 
(iii) 
Discursive  
(iv) 
Argumentative/Persuasive 
(v) 
Expository/Factual 
(vi) 
Report Writing  
(vii) Article Writing  
(viii) Writing of minutes for a meeting 
(ix) 
Writing of Curriculum Vitae 
(x) 
Letter Writing 
(xi) 
Profile Writing  
(xii) Biography/Auto Biography 
(xiii) Speech Writing  
The word range for both compositions will be from 250 to 350. 

--- PDF_PAGE 21 ---
- 5 - 
 
The following is the Content for the English Language Final Examination: 
SECTION 
ELEMENT OF CONSTRUCT  
ITEM 
MARKS 
TOTAL 
A 
EoC 4 
1 
20 
20 
B 
EoC 3 
1 
30 
50 
1 
20 
C 
EoC 4 
1 
30 
30 
TOTAL 
100 
3.3 
Level of Difficulty 
The level of difficulty of the questions in the Final English Language assessment will range from 
Remembering to Creating of the cognitive domain of the revised Bloom‘s Taxonomy.  
The difficulty of the items will be determined by the following factors: 
(i) Components of the Scenario: The real-life situation on given Element of Construct that a 
candidate will be expected to respond to correctly. 
(ii) Level of Competence: The subject knowledge and skills required to respond to real-life and 
challenges correctly. 
(iii) The Cognitive Level: The complexity and/or number of cognitive processes required to 
generate responses to items and tasks. 
(iv) The level of abstract and critical thinking involved to generate responses 
(v)   The extent to which a candidate will have to strategise in order to respond to the items or tasks. 
3.4 
Syllabus Coverage 
The examination will be based on the English Language Syllabus – Form 1 to 4. (CDC, 2024). in 
the skills tested. The use of the Syllabus, Test Specification, Test Framework and SBA Framework 
will ensure reliability, validity and comparability of the examination from year to year. 
Listening and Speaking skills will be assessed as School Based Assessment (SBA)  
Reading and Writing skills will be examined through Reading Comprehension, Summary and 
Composition. 
Syllabus Coverage English Language  
Element of Construct 
Component 1  
Component 2 
Syllabus Coverage 
Cognitive 
Levels 
School 
Based 
Assessment 
Final Paper 
Structure 
Reading 
Comprehension and 
Summary 
Composition 
Form 2 
Form 3 
Form 4 
EoC1: Interprets and 
understands 
spoken 
information  
EoC2: Produces ideas, 
thoughts and 
opinions through 
spoken language 
Form 2 
(100 marks) 
 
 
Remembering, 
Understanding 
  Applying 
Analysing 
Form 3 
(100 marks) 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 22 ---
- 6 - 
 
EoC4: Demonstrates 
masterly of 
written language 
conventions  
 
20 Marks 
 
Use scenarios or 
passages to come up 
with questions that 
will test a variety of 
language structures. 
Remembering, 
Understanding 
Applying  
EoC3: Reads, interprets 
and summarises 
continuous and 
non-continuous 
texts  
 
 
50 Marks 
 
Comprehension 
questions will cover 
all the competence 
descriptors in the test 
specification table,  
 
The summary 
question will test any 
type from list of 
competences to 
produce a note, prose 
or table summary 
Remembering 
Understanding 
Applying 
Analysing  
Evaluating  
EoC4: Demonstrates 
masterly of 
written language 
conventions 
 
30 Marks 
 
Produce different 
composition types 
and styles of writing 
Applying 
Analysing 
Evaluating  
Creating 
Total  
300 marks 
100 Marks  
 
 
4.      Scoring Criteria 
4.1 School Based Assessment – Component 1 
(i) SBA will be scored locally at school by the subject teacher.  
(ii) The teacher should use the Scoring Rubric and Guides stipulated in the School Based Assessment 
Guidelines for the Examination for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary level – Literature and 
Languages. 
(iii) All learners scores should be recorded by the subject teacher in the score sheet 9See sample in the 
SBA Guidelines. 
Head Teachers must ensure that once scores have been captured online, a hardcopy is printed and 
sent to the Provincial Education Officers (PEO) through the District Education Board Secretary 
(DEBS) for onwards submission to ECZ. 
 
4.2 Final Examination – Component 2 
Before marking commences, a co-ordination meeting will be held to harmonise the scoring criteria 
for that particular year. Furthermore, during marking, continuous checking of scoring will be done 
to ensure that examiners maintain the standard of scoring by conforming to the scoring criteria.  
The final examination will be marked centrally by the ECZ trained Examiners (Scorers) 
Section A – Demonstrates masterly of written language conventions - Language Structure (20 marks) 
Assessment in structure will focus on learner‘s ability to apply grammatical rules and concepts in context; 
construct clear, effective sentences; demonstrate accuracy and precision in writing, and use language 
structures to convey meaning and purpose. Marks will be allocated to each item. 
Section B - Reads, Interprets and summarises continuous and non-continuous texts - Reading, 
Comprehension and Summary (50 marks) 

--- PDF_PAGE 23 ---
- 7 - 
 
All mark allocations will be indicated in brackets against each task. The mark which will be awarded will 
represent the examiner‘s impression of its value as a whole. A summary may be better or worse than the 
sum of its parts, depending on whether or not the candidate has obeyed the rubric of summary test item. 
Section C Demonstrates masterly of written language conventions - Composition (30 marks) 
Candidates‘ work will be scored using impression marking and error analysis. In judging a candidate‘s 
linguistic ability, content and arrangement of work, the following shall be considered: 
4.1 
variety and quality of sentence structures. 
4.2 
range and effectiveness of vocabulary e.g. idioms, proverbs, etc. 
4.3 
control of expression by the use of punctuation. 
4.4 
appropriateness of paragraphing and the use of links between paragraphs. 
4.5 
frequency and type of errors. 
5. 
Notes and Guidelines 
5.1 
Candidates will be expected to take part in SBA as well as sit the final examination in order to be 
graded in the subject. If a candidate absconds from one of the components, NO partial marks shall 
be graded. 
5.2 
British English should be used in answering the examination questions. American English is 
allowed as long as it is consistently used in the response and it is not mixed with British English. 
5.3 
Dictionaries, textbooks and any other reference books will not be allowed in the examination room. 
5.4 
Electronic devices such as mobile phones, tablets, iPods and laptops will not be allowed in the 
examination room. 
6. 
Exemplar Test Items 
English Language Component 1 and 2 
The Elements of Construct EoC 1 and 2 will be assessed at school as School Based Assessment 
EoC 4: Demonstrates masterly of written language conventions 
 - Structure  
 (20marks) 
Example 1: (10 marks) 
Last Saturday, I woke up at the crack of dawn because I had 
to get ready for a family trip. Upon arrival at our destination, 
we tried to check in at the nearest hotel but found the rooms 
fully booked, It was like hitting a brick wall. We decided to 
drive on to see if there was any alternative, hoping every 
cloud has a silver lining. 
On the way, our car suddenly broke down. We had to call for 
help, and while waiting, we unexpectedly bumped into an old 
friend who kindly offered to look after our luggage. That was 
truly a blessing in disguise. 
Finally, the mechanic sorted out the problem, and we were 
able to carry on with our journey,  
(a) 
Identify and write down four phrasal verbs from the 
scenario.  
 [4 marks] 
(b) 
Pick out three (3) idioms and cite their  
meaning. 
 [6 marks] 
Answers 
Phrasal Verbs.  
woke up 
get ready 
check in 
pick me up 
broke down 
look after 
carry on 
(Any four) 
Idiomatic Expressions 
At the crack of dawn - very early in the morning 
Hitting a brick wall - face an obstacle 
Every cloud has a silver lining- something good comes 
out of a bad situation 
Bumped into- meet someone unexpectedly 
Blessing in disguise - something that seems bad but 
turns out good 
[Any three] 
This is a structure test item at remembering and understanding levels where a candidate is expected to recall already 

--- PDF_PAGE 24 ---
- 8 - 
 
learnt material and demonstrate understanding. 
Specific Competence: Use phrasal verbs in sentences. 
Key Competence: Analytical Thinking / Critical Thinking 
Example 2 (10 marks) 
You are the editor of your school magazine. A writer submits 
the following short paragraph for publication: 
“Students in our school enjoys participating in club activities 
because it help them to develop various skills. The debates 
club often hold meeting after school, and the science club 
usually do experiments during weekend. Many students says 
that joining clubs have made them more confident.” 
Edit the language structure and suggest improvements for the 
following: 
(a) 
One tense mistake. 
[1 mark] 
(b) 
Five subject-verb agreement.  
[5 marks] 
(c) 
Rewrite the paragraph into two clear and well-
structured sentences that show correct grammar.  [4 
marks] 
Answers: 
(a) … joining clubs have made … 
The correct tense is … joining clubs has made … 
(b)  (Any five of these may be accepted) 
1.  “Students … enjoys participating …” 
Correct: “Students in our school enjoy 
participating …” 
2. “… because it help them …” 
Correct: “… because it helps them …” 
3. “The debates club often hold meeting …” 
Correct: “The debates club often holds 
meetings …” 
4. “… usually do experiments …” Correct: “… 
usually does experiments …” 
5. “Many students says …” 
Correct: “Many students say …” 
6.   “… joining clubs have made …” Correct: 
“… joining clubs has made …” 
Students in our school enjoy participating in club 
activities (1) because it helps them develop important 
skills. (1) The Debate Club holds meetings after 
school, while the Science Club conducts experiments 
on weekends, (1) and many students say that joining 
these clubs has made them more confident. (1) 
This is a structure test item at remembering and applying levels where a candidate is expected to recall already learnt 
material and demonstrate understanding and applying by constructing correct sentences. 
specific Competence: Use present simple tense in sentences / Use subject-verb agreement in sentences … 
Key Competence: Analytical Thinking / Critical Thinking 
EoC 3: Reads, interprets and summarises continuous and non-continuous texts - Reading Comprehension and 
Summary  
                                                                                    (50 marks) 
Read the following passage and do the tasks that follow: 
GENDER BASED VIOLENCE 
1. 
Gender-based violence is one of the most pervasive human rights violations across the globe, disproportionately 
affecting women and girls and undermining social, economic, and political progress. It encompasses a wide range 
of harmful acts, including physical, sexual, psychological, and economic abuse, and its impact ripple across 
generations. The United Nations defines gender-based violence as violence that results in, or is likely to result in, 
physical, sexual, or psychological harm or suffering, including threats, coercion, or deprivation of liberty, whether 
occurring in public or private life. While men and boys can also be victims, women and girls are disproportionately 
affected due to entrenched gender inequalities and patriarchal norms that normalise male dominance and female 
subordination. 
2.  
Globally, one in three women experiences physical or sexual violence in her lifetime, most often at the hands of an 
intimate partner. In Zambia, the situation is particularly severe: nearly half of women aged fifteen to forty-nine 
have experienced physical violence since the age of fifteen and almost one in five has faced sexual violence. Early 
marriage compounds the problem, with close to forty percent of Zambian women married before the age of 

--- PDF_PAGE 25 ---
- 9 - 
 
eighteen, exposing them to lifelong risks of abuse and exploitation. These statistics highlight that gender-based 
violence is not isolated but systemic, rooted in cultural practices, economic inequalities and weak enforcement of 
protective laws. It is a phenomenon that thrives in silence and secrecy, often hidden within households and 
communities, yet its consequences are visible in the health, economic and social fabric of societies. 
3.  
Several factors drive the persistence of gender-based violence. Patriarchal norms remain deeply embedded in many 
cultures, reinforcing unequal power dynamics and legitimising control over women‘s bodies and choices. 
Economic dependence is another critical factor as women who lack financial autonomy are more vulnerable to 
exploitation and abuse. Weak legal frameworks or poor enforcement of existing laws allow perpetrators to act with 
impunity while cultural practices such as child marriage or the payment of bride price reinforce the idea that 
women are possessions rather than individuals with rights. Conflict and displacement further exacerbate the 
problem as instability increases the risks of sexual violence, exploitation and trafficking. 
4.  
The consequences of gender-based violence are profound and multidimensional. Survivors often suffer physical 
injuries, unwanted pregnancies, sexually transmitted infection, and long-term psychological trauma. The economic 
impacts are equally devastating, reducing productivity, increasing healthcare costs, and perpetuating cycles of 
poverty. In Zambia, thousands of criminal cases and even murders have been linked to gender-based violence, 
straining social services and the justice system. Socially, violence erodes trust within families and communities, 
perpetuating cycles of inequality and marginalisation. Children exposed to violence are more likely to experience 
trauma, poor educational outcomes and to perpetuate violence in adulthood, creating a generational cycle that is 
difficult to break. 
5.  
Efforts to combat gender-based violence must be comprehensive and multi-sectoral. Strong laws against domestic 
violence, sexual assault, and child marriage must not only be enacted but also enforced, with survivors given 
access to justice systems that protect them from retaliation. Education and awareness campaigns are vital in 
challenging harmful norms and promoting gender equality, while schools should integrate gender sensitivity and 
rights education into their curricula. Economic empowerment is another crucial strategy as providing women with 
access to education, employment, and financial independence reduces vulnerability and strengthens resilience. 
Support services such as shelters, counselling, and healthcare are essential for survivors while hotlines and safe 
reporting mechanisms encourage victims to seek help without fear. Importantly, engaging men and boys in the 
fight against gender-based violence is critical. Transforming attitudes among men through programmes that 
promote positive masculinity can reduce violence and foster healthier relationships. 
 
6.  
Gender-based violence is not only a violation of individual rights but also a barrier to national development and 
social justice. It perpetuates cycles of poverty, inequality and trauma, undermining the well-being of entire 
communities. Addressing it requires legal, social and cultural transformation, alongside strong political will and 
grassroots activism. Ultimately, the fight against gender-based violence is a fight for human dignity, equality and 
freedom. Every society that aspires to progress must confront this issue head-on, ensuring that women and girls 
live free from fear and violence. Only then can communities unlock their full potential and build futures rooted in 
justice and equality. 
Comprehension (30 marks) 
 
Example 1 
 
Paragraph 1. ―…. its impact ripple across generations.‖ Explain what 
is meant by ―ripple across generations” 
A figurative expression: Affects not only the 
present time but also the future of many 
generations (2 marks) 
This is a comprehension test item at applying acquired knowledge and facts to solve a problem. 
Specific Competence: Read and comprehend information. 
Key Competence: Analytical Thinking / Critical Thinking 
Example 2 
 
According to the passage, ―one in three women experiences physical 
or sexual violence in her lifetime.‖ You are carrying out a survey and 
discover that 305 women of your sample (research population) have 
experienced physical or sexual violence in their life? Calculate the 
total number of your sample. 
The correct answer: 
915 women (2 marks) 
This is a comprehension test item at applying acquired knowledge and facts to solve a problem.  
Specific Competence: Read and comprehend information. 

--- PDF_PAGE 26 ---
- 10 - 
 
Key Competence: Analytical Thinking / Critical Thinking 
Example 3 
Summary (20 marks) 
Answer 
Identify the consequences of gender-based violence (GBV) and the 
strategies mentioned in the passage for fighting it? Present a well-
connected summary in not more than 150 words. The summary has 
been started for you. 
Gender based violence has a lot of consequences … 
The correct answer will cite the consequences 
of gender-based violence and the strategies 
mentioned for fighting it. The word limit 
should be maintained. 
This is a summary test item at analysing and evaluating levels where a candidate is expected to identify, select and 
organise relevant information from a given text to compose a prose summary.  
Specific Competence: Write a prose summary. 
Key Competence: Analytical Thinking / Problem Solving / Communication 
EoC4: Demonstrates masterly of written language conventions - Composition (20 marks) 
Example1:  Descriptive Composition 
Your friend you met on social media would like to visit your country 
on holiday. He does not know the tourist attractions in Zambia. Write 
a letter to him describing one of the most frequented tourist attractions 
in Zambia. 
In your letter, explain why the tourist should not miss visiting this 
particular place. Write between 250 and 350 words 
Answer 
The correct answer should bring out 
 the layout of a friendly/informal letter 
 a clear description of a place. The candidate 
should paint a vivid picture of the place 
using describing words. 
The length of the composition should be 
between 250 and 350 words. 
This is a descriptive composition task at applying and creating levels where a candidate is expected to use adjectives 
and other appropriate language devices to paint a clear picture of the place being described in the mind of the reader 
and present it in a letter form. 
Specific Competence: Write a description of a person an animal or an object. 
Key Competence: Communication /Critical Thinking / Creativity and Innovation  
Example 2: Narrative Composition 
Answer 
Write a story with one of the following titles. 
Either 
(a) 
Killing two Birds with one Stone 
Or 
(b) 
Betrayed 
The correct answer should bring out the correct 
interpretation of the chosen adage/title. The 
rubric must be observed, i.e. the word limit and 
writing on only one title. 
This is a narrative composition question at evaluating and creating levels where a candidate is expected to interpret the 
adage (Killing two birds with the same Stone) or the title (Betrayed) and compose a continuous piece of writing. 
Specific Competence: Compose stories 
Key Competence: Critical Thinking / Creativity and innovation / Communication 
Example 3: Argumentative Composition 
Substance abuse among the youth should be controlled. Argue for or 
against. 
Answer 
The correct answer should bring out 
 one side of the argument only 
 points in support of the side of the argument 
taken. 
The length of the composition should be 
between 250 and 350 words. 
 
This is an argumentative composition and factual in nature. The task is at analysing and creating levels where a 
candidate is expected to cite points in support of one side of the argument only and compose a continuous piece of 
writing. A candidate who brings out both sides infringes the rubric 
Specific Competence: Write argumentative compositions. 
Key Competence: Creativity and innovation / Communication / Critical Thinking 
