
--- PDF_PAGE 237 ---
- 221 - 
 
Chapter 20: Fashion and Fabrics – 6012  
1.      Construct 
Demonstrates understanding of fabrics, designs and constructs garments to suit market trends. 
2. 
Elements of Construct  
Fashion and Fabrics examination will be based on five (5) Elements of Construct (EoC) coming from four 
contributory fields namely: Textile and clothing, garment construction processes, entrepreneurship, and 
Needlework and Crafts. 
The following are the Elements of Construct with a summary of what they will assess: 
EoC1 
Makes informed choices and expresses innovative skills in the fashion industry 
 
Explores concepts in Fashion and Fabrics and potential career paths in textile clothing.  
• 
Practices work ethics in the fashion industry and makes informed choices. 
EoC2 
Demonstrates technical knowledge and skills while promoting workplace safety 
 
Drafts Patterns pieces and designs appropriate styles that fit into modern trends. 
• 
Employs sustainable practices in the use of various needlework tools that promote safety 
and creation of appropriate textile designs in garment construction.  
EoC3 
Develops habits and sense of responsibility in managing personal and social development 
• 
Practices good personal hygiene and good health habits in fashion industry. 
• 
Applies techniques of good grooming and health habits in cosmetology. 
EoC4 
Demonstrates knowledge on the use, care and improvisation of tools and material in 
fashion industry for economic use of tools and materials 
• 
Designs fashionable articles using locally available materials. 
 
Utilises tools to create articles from various crafts. 
EoC 5 
Expresses awareness of create income generating opportunities for self-reliance and 
economic growth  
• 
Applies Entrepreneurial skills in the fashion industry.  
• 
Manages textiles enterprise, apply consumer rights and responsibilities, laws and 
regulations, and demonstrate wise shopping.  
3. 
Test Design 
Fashion and Fabrics examination will consist of two Components, 1 and 2.  
Component 1 will be School Based Assessment (SBA) which will be set and scored in schools by subject 
teachers. It will be administered in Form 2 and 3.  
Component 2 will be the Final Examination administered at the end of Form 4. It will be set and marked 
centrally by the Examinations Council of Zambia (ECZ) at the end of Form 4.  
The SBA will be weighted 30% while the Final Examination will be weighted 70% by ECZ. 
 
 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 238 ---
- 222 - 
 
 
 
Structure 
Table 1: The structure of Fashion and Fabrics – Component 1 and 2 
Component Name 
Code 
Number of test 
items/ Tasks 
Level 
Duration 
 
Total 
Marks 
SBA  
Component 1 
6012/1 
7 
Form 2 
1 year 
100 
7 
Form 3 
1 year 
100 
TOTAL 
200 
Final Examination 
Component 2 
 
6012/2 
7 
Form 4 
2h 30min 
90 
 
The Test Design will consider Structure and Test Content of the assessment for Fashion and Fabrics. 
3.1 
Structure 
3.1.1 School Based Assessment - Component 1  
SBA tasks will assess learners based on all the five EoC.  
The component will have a total of fourteen (14) items; seven (7) at Form 2 and seven (7) at 
Form 3 which will have a total of 200 marks at the end of Secondary Education Ordinary 
Level.  
The structure of the SBA tasks will be determined by the subject teacher and the type of tasks 
that corresponds to learners‘ abilities and challenges. 
3.1.2 Final Examination - Component 2  
The Final Examination will assess learners on all the five EoC. The component will have 
two sections, A and B.  
Section A (15 marks) will have two sketch test items and a candidate will have to choose 
one.  
Section B (75 marks) will have five test items derived from the five EoC and they will all be 
compulsory. Each item will carry 15 marks.  
A candidate will be required to respond to a total of six (6) out of 7 items rendering 
Component 2 a total of 90 marks. 
3.2  
Test Content 
The Test Content will consider Test Item Types, Level of Difficulty and Syllabus Coverage. 
3.2.1 
Types of Tasks and Items 
School Based Assessment - Component 1: will use both formative and summative 
assessments. The tasks will be administered through written tasks, practical tasks and 
projects. The teacher will decide to present the tasks structured, semi structured or 
unstructured. (For details, refer to the School Based Assessment Guidelines for 
Examination for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level for Practical Subjects, 
produced by the ECZ).   
Final Examination - Component 2:  will be a summative assessment. Section A and B 
will have different types of test item.  

--- PDF_PAGE 239 ---
- 223 - 
 
Section A: will assess designing skills. It will require candidates to sketch various pattern 
pieces based on a scenario and prescribed measurements or a given size. The section will 
assess candidates‘ level of knowledge to interpret given information as well as their skill 
level to design and sketch pattern pieces.   
Section B: will require candidates to give brief explanations, some with the use of 
illustrations. Each test item will cover related topics and competences as clustered in the 
EoC. The test items will be structured, semi structured or unstructured depending on the 
scenario and competences to be assessed.  
3.2.2 
Syllabus Coverage 
The examination will cover the entire Fashion and Fabrics Syllabus for Secondary 
Education Ordinary Level, Form 1-4 produced by Curriculum Development Centre (CDC 
2024 edition). 
The development of SBA tasks and Final Examination test items will be aligned to the key 
competences such as analytical thinking, citizenship, collaboration creativity and 
innovation, critical thinking, communication, digital literacy, problem solving, 
entrepreneurship, financial literacy, environmental sustainability and emotional intelligence 
as guided in the Syllabus.  
The test items and tasks will also be linked to clusters of related topics and competences 
which have been grouped into EoC. The specific competences are reflected in the SBA Test 
Framework, Test Framework and Test Specification table produced by the ECZ. These 
assessment tools will ensure validity, reliability and comparability of the assessments from 
year to year.   
Distribution of marks across Elements of Construct 1 to 5 for Component 2 
EoC1 
EoC2 
EoC3 
EoC4 
EoC5 
Total Marks 
15 
23 
15 
22 
15 
90 
 
3.2.3 
Level of Difficulty 
The level of difficulty for tasks in Component 1 and test items in Component 2 will assess 
the acquisition of knowledge and application of skills across all the six levels of the revised 
Bloom‘s taxonomy. The acquisition of knowledge will be assessed through remembering 
and understanding of concepts while application of skills will be assessed through 
applying, analysing, evaluating and creating.  
Both component 1 and 2 will be Competence Based Assessments (CBA) which will be 
presented in real life scenarios. Candidates will need to apply critical thinking, innovation, 
creativity and problem-solving skills in order to come up with expected responses. 
The levels of difficulty for test items and tasks will be determined by the following factors: 
(i) The complexity of the scenario or real-life situation on a given Element of Construct 
that a candidate will be expected to respond to.    
(ii) The subject knowledge and skills required to respond to the real-life problems and 
challenges (level of competence). 
(iii) The complexity and number of cognitive processes required to generate responses to 
test items and tasks. 
(iv) The level of abstract critical thinking involved to arrive at a response. 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 240 ---
- 224 - 
 
(v) The extent to which a candidate will have to strategise in order to respond to the items 
and tasks. 
Distribution of marks across the revised levels of Bloom‟s Taxonomy: Component 2 
Cognitive 
Level 
Remembering Understanding Applying Analysing Evaluating 
Creating 
Marks 
Marks 
distribution 
10 
30 
16 
15 
5 
14 
90 
4. 
Scoring Criteria 
School Based Assessment - Component 1: will be scored by teachers in their respective schools as 
guided by scoring guides and rubrics found in the School Based Assessments Guidelines for Examination 
for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level for Practical Subjects produced by the ECZ. 
Final Examination - Component 2: will be marked centrally by ECZ using marking schemes provided 
by the ECZ. (Refer to Chapter 30 on Grading and Certification). 
NB: To achieve an overall mark for Hospitality Management, a candidate must sit both components. No 
overall grade will be awarded to a candidate who absents from any of the components. 
5. 
Notes and Guidelines for – Component 1 and 2  
SN 
Notes and Guidelines 
Component 
5.1 
Candidates should demonstrate the application of knowledge and understanding of concepts 
and theories through critical thinking in order to generate required responses to problems 
rather than just memorising facts.  
1 and 2 
5.2 
All the five (5) EoC should be assessed and each candidate should have an experience of 
each EoC. 
1 and 2 
5.3 
Candidates will be required to respond to a total of six (6) out of seven test items at a total of 
90 marks. 
2 
5.4 
Teachers should administer formative assessment tasks along side teaching as part of 
teaching and learning process. 
1 
5.5 
Teachers should administer a total of 14 SBA tasks; 7 at Form 2 and 7 at Form 3 and submit 
all scores to ECZ. 
1 
5.6 
Projects in form of presentations, research work or artifacts should be strictly supervised and 
scored at each stage as opposed to receiving completely finished projects.  
1 
5.7 
Teachers should utilise group work tasks during practicing and perfecting learners‘ skills but 
for tasks that are meant to be submitted to ECZ, individual tasks are preferred where 
applicable. 
1 
  

--- PDF_PAGE 241 ---
- 225 - 
 
6. 
Exemplar Test Items  
Example 1 
EoC1 
Makes informed choices and expresses innovative skills in the fashion industry 
Item 1 (15marks) 
You are designing a summer collection for line dresses for an upcoming exhibition. Most of your clients want fabrics 
that drape well. 
                                                     
Task 1: Design a suitable style to suit most of your clients.                                                  (5Marks)   
Expected Response 
Flowy maxi dress with V neck 
Gathered waist and layered skirt (Gypsy dress) 
Level of difficulty: Analysing 
Specific Competence: 1.4.1.1 Plan dressing according to function 
Task 2: Specify one (1) fabric that will be suitable for the dress and discuss four reasons for your choice of fabric. 
                                                                                                                                                      (5 Marks) 
Expected response 
Light weight chiffon; Polyester cotton; Rayon; Viscose rayon 
Reasons: light and breathable fabrics; absorbent in summer; gathers well; drapes well; layers well; comfortable and 
soft. 
Level of difficulty: Evaluate 
Specific competence: 1.1.1.1 Explores concepts in fashion and fabrics 
Task 3: Clearly explain how you would care for the selected dress according to the fabric. (5marks) 
Expected Response 
Launder in cold water; use mild detergent; do not wring or twist; use a mesh bag to protect from snags; airdry away 
direct sunlight iron while still damp; use low heat setting; store folded or drape to prevent creases. 
Level of difficulty: Applying 
Specific Competence: 2.10.1.1 Launder different types of clothes. 
 
Example 2 
EoC2 
Demonstrates technical knowledge and skills while promoting workplace safety. 
Item 2 (15marks) 
Your client wants you to make corrections on a jacket that has bulk or puckered finish on the lining so as to give a 
better look.  
Task 1: Make a choice of five appropriate stiches you will use and explain how you will workout the stitches to ensure 
a smooth finish.   (5marks) 
Expected Response: 
Slip stitch; blind stitch; ladder stitch; whip stitch (ideal for invisible joins) 
Workout; pin lining to outer fabric WS together; use matching thread; take tiny stiches through lining, picking up just a 
thread of outer fabrics; space stitch keeping the tension even; press carefully to avoid creases ensuring lining lies flat. 
Level of Difficulty: Understanding  
Specific Competence: 3.6.1.1 Makes use of interfacing interlining and linings  
Task 2: explain how you would press the jacket after the corrections have been affected.  (5marks) 

--- PDF_PAGE 242 ---
- 226 - 
 
Expected Response 
Press seams flat on the lower edges; use a steam iron on low – medium heat with a pressing cloth; hang to cool 
allowing fabric to set; give a final press with steam, smoothing out any wrinkles. 
Level of Difficulty: Applying 
Specific Competence:1.8.2.1 Press and iron articles during construction 
Task 3:  What could have caused the jacked to a have bulk or purkerd finish?   (5marks) 
Expected Response 
Tight lining; uneven stitching; poor choice of thread; poor choice of stitches 
Level of difficulty: analysing 
Specific Competence: 3.6.1.1 Make use of interfacing, interlining and linings. 
 
 
