
--- PDF_PAGE 243 ---
- 227 - 
 
Chapter 21: Food and Nutrition – 6014  
1. 
Construct  
Applies knowledge, skills and values in human nutrition and food technology for a healthy life style and 
sustainable food industry.  
2. 
Elements of Construct   
Food and Nutrition examination will be based on six (6) Elements of Construct (EoC) drawn from 
clustered competences of related competences of Food and Nutrition.  
The following are the Elements of Construct with a summary of what they will assess:  
EoC1 
Explores the Kitchen, equipment, utensils and materials   
 Designs various kitchen layouts  
 Uses and cares for kitchen equipment and utensils safely.  
EoC2 
Understands Fundamentals of Food and Nutrition  
 Plans healthy meals according to individual dietary needs and lifestyles for health living.  
EoC3 
Prepares and Serves Meals and Dishes  
 Applies cookery terms in meal preparation,  
 Applies principles underlying heat transfer and effects of heat on food in the preparation of 
meals and dishes using various methods of cooking.  
 Demonstrates understanding on meal courses, table etiquettes and principles of food 
presentation.  
EoC4 
Innovates Food Packaging and Storage Solutions   
 Applies techniques to Store and package food to reduce food spoilage and wastage. 
 Employs acceptable and hygiene practices in food packaging and storage.  
EoC5 
Demonstrates Knowledge and Practices that Promote Sustainable Food Security  
 Makes use of animals and vegetables in maintaining a food basket  
EoC6 
Develops Skills in Consumers and Entrepreneurs through Research  
 Analyses and identifies opportunities to establish various business ventures in the food 
industry. 
 Demonstrates entrepreneurial skills in food industry. 
3. 
Test Design  
The Food and Nutrition examination will consist of two components namely, 1 and 2.  
Component 1 will be School Based Assessment (SBA) which will be set and scored in schools by subject 
teachers. It will be administered in Form 2 and 3.  Component 2 will be the Final Examination 
administered by the ECZ at the end of Form 4. It will be set and marked centrally by ECZ.  
The SBA will be weighted 30% while the Final Examination will be weighted 70% by ECZ. 
Summary of the Test Design for Food and Nutrition – Component 1 and 2 
Component Name 
Code 
Number of 
items/tasks 
Level 
Duration 
Total marks 
SBA - Component 1  
6014/1 
7 
Form 2 
1 year 
100 
7 
Form 3 
1 year 
100 
Final Examination 
Component 2 
6014/2 
7 
Form 4 
2 hours 30 
minutes 
90 

--- PDF_PAGE 244 ---
- 228 - 
 
The Test Design will consider Structure and Test Content of the assessment for Hospitality Management. 
3.1 
Structure   
3.1.1 
School Based Assessment - Component 1  
SBA tasks will assess learners based on all the six EoC as prescribed herein.  
Component 1 will have a total of fourteen (14) tasks; seven (7) in Form 2 and seven (7) in 
Form 3 which will have a total of 200 marks at the end of Secondary Education Ordinary 
Level.  
The structure of the SBA tasks will be determined by the subject teacher and the type of 
tasks with regard to learners‘ progression abilities. 
3.1.2 
Final Examination - Component 2  
The Final Examination will assess learners on all the six EoC. The component will have two 
sections, A and B.  
Section A (15 marks) will have two test items which will come from one EoC and 
candidates will have to choose one item only. Each item will carry 15 marks.  
Section B (75 marks) will have five items derived from the remaining five EoC and they 
will all be compulsory.  Each item will carry 15 marks.  
A candidate will be required to respond to a total of six (6) out of seven (7) test items 
rendering Component 2 a total of 90 marks. 
3.2. 
Test Content   
The test content for both Component 1 and 2 will be considered in terms of Test Item Types, Level 
of Difficulty and Syllabus Coverage.  
3.2.1 
Types of Tasks and Items 
School Based Assessment - Component 1: Will use both formative and summative 
assessments. The tasks will consist of structured, semi structured and unstructured tasks 
which will be presented in form of written, practical and projects. The tasks will be drawn 
from all the six EoC. (For details, refer to the School Based Assessment Guidelines for 
Examination for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level for Practical Subjects, 
produced by the ECZ).   
Final Examination - Component 2: will be summative assessment which will consist of 
structured, semi structured or unstructured test items.  
Section A: will have two items derived from one EoC. It will assess candidates‘ ability and 
skills to analyse a scenario and create a menu, budget, diet, kitchen plan, business plan or 
food labels. The section will assess candidates‘ level of knowledge to interpret given 
information and ability to create or innovate something.   
Section B: will require candidates to give brief explanations according to the interpretation 
of the task. Each test item will cover related topics and competences as clustered in the 
EoC. The test items will be structured, semi structured or unstructured depending on the 
scenario and competences to be assessed.  
3.2.2 
Syllabus Coverage  
The examination will be derived from the Food and Nutrition Syllabus for Secondary 
Education Ordinary Level, Form 1-4 produced by Curriculum Development Centre (CDC 
2024 edition). 

--- PDF_PAGE 245 ---
- 229 - 
 
The development of SBA tasks and Final Examination test items will be aligned to the key 
competences such as analytical thinking, citizenship, collaboration creativity and 
innovation, critical thinking, communication, digital literacy, problem solving, 
entrepreneurship, financial literacy, environmental sustainability and emotional intelligence 
as guided in the Syllabus.  
The test items and tasks will also be linked to clusters of related topics and competences 
which have been grouped into EoC. The specific competences are reflected in the SBA Test 
Framework, Test Framework and Test Specification table produced by the ECZ. These 
assessment tools will ensure validity, reliability and comparability of the assessments from 
year to year.   
Distribution of marks across Elements of Construct 1 to 6 for Component 2 
EoC1 
EoC2 
EoC3 
EoC4  
EoC5  
EoC6 
Marks 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
90 
3.2.3 
Level of Difficulty  
The level of difficulty for tasks in Component 1 and test items in Component 2 will assess 
the acquisition of knowledge and application of skills across all the six levels of the revised 
Bloom‘s taxonomy. The acquisition of knowledge will be assessed through remembering 
and understanding of concepts while application of skills will be assessed through applying, 
analysing, evaluating and creating.  
Both component 1 and 2 will be Competence Based Assessments (CBA) which will present 
real life scenarios. Candidates will need to apply critical thinking creativity, innovation and 
problem-solving skills in order to come up with expected responses. 
The levels of difficulty for test items and tasks will be determined by the following factors: 
(i) The complexity of the scenario or real-life situation on a given Element of Construct 
that a candidate will be expected to respond to.    
(ii) The subject knowledge and skills required to respond to the real-life problems and 
challenges (level of competence). 
(iii) The complexity and number of cognitive processes required to generate responses to 
test items and tasks. 
(iv) The level of abstract critical thinking involved to arrive at a response. 
 
(v) The extent to which a candidate will have to strategise in order to respond to the items 
and tasks. 
 
Distribution of marks across the revised levels of Bloom‟s Taxonomy: Component 2 
Cognitive level 
Rem. 
Under. 
Apply. 
Analys. 
Evalu. 
Creat. 
Marks 
Marks 
Distribution 
15 
25 
25 
10 
5 
10 
90 
4 
Scoring Criteria 
School Based Assessment - Component 1: will be scored by teachers in their respective schools as 
guided by scoring guides and rubrics found in the School Based Assessment Guidelines for Examination 
for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level for Practical Subjects produced by the ECZ. 

--- PDF_PAGE 246 ---
- 230 - 
 
Final Examination - Component 2: will be marked centrally by ECZ using marking schemes provided 
by the ECZ. (Refer to Chapter 10 on Grading and Certification). 
NB: To achieve an overall mark for Food and Nutrition, a candidate must sit both components. No overall 
grade will be awarded to a candidate who absents from any of the components. 
5 
Notes and Guidelines - Component 1 and 2  
SN 
Notes and Guidelines 
Component 
5.1 
Candidates should demonstrate the application of knowledge and understanding of 
concepts and theories through critical thinking in order to generate required 
responses to problems rather than just memorising facts.  
1 and 2 
5.2 
All the six (6) EoC should be assessed and each candidate should have a feel of each 
EoC. 
1 and 2 
5.3 
Candidates will be required to respond to a total of six (6) out of seven (7) test items 
at a total of 90 marks. 
2 
5.4 
Teachers should administer formative assessment tasks along side teaching as part 
of teaching and learning process. 
1 
5.5 
Teachers should administer a total of 14 SBA tasks; 7 at Form 2 and 7 at Form 3 and 
submit all scores to ECZ. 
1 
5.6 
Projects in form of presentations, research work or artifacts should be strictly 
supervised and scored at each stage as opposed to receiving completely finished 
projects.  
1 
5.7 
Teachers should utilise group work tasks during practicing and perfecting learners‘ 
skills but for tasks that are meant to be submitted to ECZ, individual tasks are 
preferred where applicable. 
1 
  
6. 
Exemplar Test Items  
Example 1:  Component 1 or 2 
EoC3 
Prepares and Serves Meals and Dishes 
Item 1 (Written and presentation task 20marks) 
After exploring a bustling business centre, you decide to have lunch at Tulye Restaurant. After getting inside, you 
notice dirty uncleared tables, flies and wet floor around the hand washing bay. You try to call a waiter you can‘t 
identify any as they are all casually dressed. You decide to meet the supervisor in order to share and address some 
issues you have observed around.  
Task 1: highlight five dangers that would arise from the concerns you have observation at the restaurant.  (5marks) 
Expected Response: Disease out breaks; loss of Customers; loss of revenue; food poisoning; Food contamination; 
risking closure of the restaurant. 
Level of difficulty: Remembering 
Task 2:  Discuss with the supervisor five routine habits the workers should adopt at the restaurant. (5marks)                      
Expected response: Clean as you go; Cover hair; put on clean aprons; clean and sanitize frequently; wipe spills 
immediately; wear uniform and name tag always. 
Level of difficulty: Understanding  

--- PDF_PAGE 247 ---
- 231 - 
 
Task 3: Prepare and make a presentation to address workers on the importance of kitchen and personal hygiene. 
(10marks) 
Expected Response: Kitchen hygiene; waste disposal; pest management plan; body and oral hygiene; washing and 
sanitising;  
Level of difficulty: Applying 
Example 2: Component 1 or 2 
EoC2 
Understands Fundamentals of Food and Nutrition 
Item 2 (Written and Presentation 20marks) 
You are on internship with a Nutrition agency and you are visiting primary schools to check on learners‘ health. At 
Park primary school, you find some learners in kindergarten exhibiting deficiencies that are so difficulty to tell apart. 
After talking to a few parents, you discover that most families in the area struggle to feed their children with proteins 
foods. Children go for months just feeding on cassava, maize and sometimes potatoes due to unavailability meaty foods 
in the area. 
Task 1: With the information you now have at hand, What disorder are most children likely to be suffering from? What 
signs and symptoms makes you conclude so?              (5marks) 
Expected Response: Kwashiorkor 
Loss of weight; stunted growth; thin arms; weak; poor concentration in class; protuberant belly; thin hair and skin; 
edema; dermatitis; diarrhea. 
Task 2: Give five recommendations to help parents follow when planning their children‘s diet.   (5marks) 
Expected Response: Start with low protein for easy digestion; slowly introduce high protein foods; include legumes; 
increase calories; adopt safe dietary habits; a avoid overfeeding; seek medical advice.  
Task 3: Suggest two alternative foods to meat that will be good to solve the problem.      (2marks) 
Expected Response: Soya beans; Soya chunks; groundnuts; moringa leaves; Tofu; fruits; vegetables; cashew nuts; 
beans. 
Level of Difficulty: Remembering 
Task 4; Make a presentation to address parents and the school on how best they can work together to maintain a health 
food basket and promote sustainable food security in their community.               (8marks) 
Expected Response: Rare chickens for meat and eggs; rare goats for milk and meat, cattle, pigs, rabbits, guinea fowls, 
doves, quails, ducks 
Level of Difficulty: Analysing; understanding. 
 
