
--- PDF_PAGE 83 ---
- 67 - 
 
Chapter 7: French Language – 1120  
1. 
Construct 
Demonstrates proficient use of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in real-life situations, 
adapting to audience and purpose to communicate effectively and support life-long learning.  
2. 
Elements of Construct 
Assessment of candidates will be based on the following four (4) Elements of Construct (EoC): 
EoC 1: Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts 
 Reads and comprehends various types of continuous and non-continuous texts. 
 Interprets vocabulary and expressions accurately, considering context, audience and purpose. 
 Identifies and summarises main ideas and supporting details. 
 Translates texts accurately from the source language into the target language, preserving 
meaning, tone and intent.  
EoC 2: Demonstrates mastery of written language conventions and transformations  
 Spells words correctly with orthographic accuracy. 
 Applies grammatical and syntactic rules accurately in sentence construction. 
 Uses appropriate punctuation to enhance clarity and meaning. 
 Manipulates and transforms written language structures while maintaining grammatical 
accuracy and meaning. 
EoC 3: Understands and interprets spoken information 
 Identifies main ideas and supporting details in spoken texts. 
 Analyses the speaker‘s purpose, tone and intended message. 
 Follows instructions, directions and questions accurately and responds appropriately. 
 Interprets spoken information from the source language into the target language while 
maintaining meaning and intent. 
EoC 4:    Produces ideas, thoughts and opinions through spoken language 
 Organises ideas logically and coherently.  
 Speaks clearly, audibly and fluently. 
 Uses appropriate vocabulary, expressions and tone suited to purpose, context and audience.  
 Demonstrates accuracy in pronunciation and grammatical structures.  
3. 
Test Design 
The French Language Examination for School Certificate of Education Ordinary Level will consist of two 
components: Component 1 will be the School Based Assessment (SBA), and Component 2 will be the 
Final Examination. The weighting of the School Based Assessment (SBA) and the Final Examination will 
be in the ratio of 40:60. The test design for the French Language examination is summarised as follows: 
Test Design for Component 1 and 2 
Component Name 
Code 
Assessment 
Level 
Number of 
Tasks/Test Items  
Duration 
Marks 
allocation 
School Based Assessment 
- Component 1 
1120/1 
Form 2 
 
5 
1 year 
90 
Form 3 
 
5 
1 year 
90 
 
Form 2-3 
1 Project 
2 years 
20 
Final Examination 
Component 2 
1120/2 
Form 4 
 
10 
2 Hours 
60 

--- PDF_PAGE 84 ---
- 68 - 
 
 
3.1 Structure 
3.1.1 
School Based Assessment - Component 1 
School Based Assessment (SBA) shall be conducted from Form 2 to Form 3 and shall 
constitute an integral component of the teaching and learning process. SBA tasks will be 
drawn from all the four (4) Elements of Construct and shall include classwork, homework, 
assignments, oral presentations and projects.  
3.1.2 
Final Examination - Component 2 
The Final Examination will be based on two Elements of Construct, namely, EoC 1: Reads, 
interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts and EoC 2: 
Demonstrates mastery of written language conventions and transformations. The paper will 
comprise three sections: A, B and C. 
 
Section A: Reading Comprehension  
               Reading Comprehension will comprise 2 items which will have 2 scenarios in form of 
passages. The passages will be non-continuous and continuous passages. Candidates will be 
expected to answer both. 
               Passages used in the examination will be adapted to the candidate‘s level of competence as 
prescribed in the syllabus. Candidates will be required to read texts written in French and 
respond to questions based on the given scenarios. Each continuous text will include semi-
structured tasks, weighted at 15 marks. The length of the reading passage will range from 
250 to 300 words.  
               Non-continuous texts will be organised in a non-linear manner, with information presented 
in the form of timetables, maps, diagrams, graphs, picture series, and similar formats. The 
visual presentations will contain sufficient information to elicit responses and will include 
semi-structured tasks, weighted at 15 marks.  
Section B: Language Structure and Translation 
This section will have two parts; 
Part 1: Language Structure 
This part shall assess candidates‘ competence in performing a range of grammatical tasks 
derived from real-life situations. The part shall comprise five items, each designed to 
evaluate the accurate and appropriate use of grammatical structures in context. 
In line with competence-based curriculum, items shall assess candidates‘ ability to apply 
grammar functionally rather than in isolation. Tasks shall therefore be contextualised and 
linked to everyday communication. 
Part 2: Translation 
This part shall assess candidates‘ competence to translate from French to English and vice 
versa. Assessment items will consist of sentences and short texts derived from real-life 
contexts. For instance, candidates may be required to translate a community notice from 
English into French for a foreign national intending to settle in Zambia, or from French into 
English to facilitate local comprehension. 
Section C: Writing 
This section shall comprise two parts: unguided composition and guided composition. In the 
unguided composition part, candidates shall attempt one compulsory item. In the guided 
composition part, candidates shall be presented with two items and shall be required to 
choose and answer one. 

--- PDF_PAGE 85 ---
- 69 - 
 
Both the Unguided and Guided Composition parts will each carry a total of 10 marks. 
Writing tasks will be based on the following text types: 
(i) 
 Informal and formal letter writing 
(ii) 
 Narrative writing 
(iii) Descriptive writing 
(iv) 
Argumentative writing 
(v) 
Curriculum vitae writing  
(vi) 
Profile writing 
3.2.  Test Content 
           The SBA at Form 2 and 3 will assess all competences outlined in the syllabus at either form level. 
The Final Examination will include topics from the syllabus from Forms 1 to 4. 
3.2.1  Types of Tasks and Items 
           Items in both School Based Assessment (SBA) and the Final Examination shall comprise a 
combination of objective and subjective types. 
(i) The question types to be used in the School Based Assessment (SBA) shall include 
multiple-choice questions, true or false items, matching items, short response questions, 
essay questions, and short answer questions, among others. 
(ii) The Final Examination shall comprise structured, semi-structured, and unstructured 
items including short response questions, completion of sentences, and essay type 
items. 
3.2.2  
Level of Difficulty 
The level of questions in both the Final Examination and School Based Assessment (SBA) 
of the French Language will be based on the Elements of Construct and will vary in 
complexity to ensure balanced coverage across lower-order, middle-order and higher-order 
cognitive domain of the revised Bloom‘s Taxonomy.  
Assessment items shall be scenario based and designed to require candidates to apply their 
knowledge, skills, values and attitudes to solve real-life communicative problems. 
The level of difficulty of the Final Examination and SBA items shall be determined by the 
following factors: 
(i) The depth and breadth of the subject knowledge and language skills required to address 
the given scenario. 
(ii) The level of cognitive complexity involved in processing and responding to the task. 
(iii) The degree of abstract reasoning and critical thinking required.  
(iv) The number and complexity of cognitive processes necessary to generate appropriate 
and meaningful responses. 
3.2.3 
Syllabus Coverage 
The Final Examination and School Based Assessment (SBA) shall be based on the French 
Language Syllabus (CDC,2024) for Forms 1 to 4. The assessment shall focus on the 
development and evaluation of key competences, such as communication, analytical 
thinking, citizenship, collaboration, problem-solving and critical thinking. 
Assessment tasks shall be designed to integrate these competences within authentic 
language contexts to promote meaningful learning and practical application. To ensure 
validity, reliability, consistency and comparability across examination cycles, the Test 
Specification, Test Framework and School Based Assessment (SBA) Framework shall be 

--- PDF_PAGE 86 ---
- 70 - 
 
applied. These tools shall guide and standardise development and moderation of test items 
and SBA tasks. 
The following table indicates how the syllabus has been summarised per Element of 
Construct, per assessment component and the cognitive levels of the revised Bloom‘s 
Taxonomy. 
Syllabus Coverage and Cognitive Levels 
Elements of 
Construct 
COMPONENT 1 
COMPONENT 2 
Syllabus 
Coverage 
Cognitive Level 
EoC 1 
Reading 
Comprehension  
Reading 
Comprehension  
 
Reading and 
demonstrating 
understanding of 
different types of texts 
and summarising given 
real-life texts or 
passages. 
Remembering, 
Understanding, 
Applying, 
Analysing, 
Evaluating and 
Creating. 
EoC 2 
Writing 
Writing 
Producing different 
types and styles of 
writing by using a 
range of grammatical 
structures. 
Remembering, 
understanding, 
Applying, 
Analysing, 
Evaluating and 
Creating. 
EoC 3 
Listening  
 
 
Listening to spoken 
passages, texts, 
dialogues, and audio 
recordings and 
responding to 
questions. 
Remembering, 
Understanding, 
and Applying. 
 
EoC 4 
Speaking 
 
Making oral 
presentations on 
various situations and 
responding 
appropriately to 
questions. 
Remembering, 
Understanding 
and Applying 
4. 
Scoring Criteria 
4.1  
School Based Assessment – Component 1 
SBA tasks will be prepared and scored by the subject teacher at the school. To ensure tasks are 
pitched at the appropriate level of difficulty, teachers will use the SBA Framework.  
Teachers will use the scoring guides for each SBA task to ensure consistency, fairness, and accuracy 
when evaluating learners‘ performance on class tests, projects, practical work, presentations, 
assignments, and other structured activities. 
4.2  
Final Examination – Component 2 
Before scoring of the Final Examination commences, a coordination meeting will be held to 
harmonise the scoring guide for the particular year. Furthermore, continuous monitoring of scoring 
will be conducted during the scoring process to ensure that examiners maintain consistent standards 
by adhering to the approved scoring guide. 
5. 
Notes and Guidelines 
5.1 
Candidates will be required to sit for both Component 1 and Component 2 in order to be graded in 
the subject. If a candidate absents themselves from either component, no partial marks shall be 
awarded. 
5.2 
Standard French shall be used in responding to the examination questions. 

--- PDF_PAGE 87 ---
- 71 - 
 
5.3  
Dictionaries, textbooks, and any other reference materials shall not be permitted in the examination 
room. 
5.4 
Electronic devices, including mobile phones, tablets, iPods, and laptops, shall not be permitted in 
the examination room. 
          Note: Detailed guidelines for School Based Assessment are stipulated in the „Guidelines for School 
Based Assessment‟ developed by the Examinations Council of Zambia. 
6. 
Exemplar Test Items 
 
EoC 1: Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts. 
 
 
SECTION A: READING COMPREHENSION                   [30 MARKS] 
Item 1 
A. Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow. 
                      MA FAMILLE 
Je m‘appelle Chipo et j‘ai 14 ans. J‘ai une famille très sympathique. Nous sommes une famille de six personnes : mon 
père, ma mère, ma sœur, mes deux frères et moi. 
Mon père s‘appelle monsieur Kumwenda. Il est médecin et il travaille à l‘hôpital général de Monze. Il y va le matin à 7 
heures et rentre le soir à 18 heures. 
Il travaille du lundi au vendredi. Mais on l‘appelle aussi pendant certains samedis et dimanches quand il y a des cas 
d‘urgences comme les opérations. 
Ma mère s‘appelle Rite. Elle est comptable à la banque Stanbic. Elle se lève tôt le matin pour préparer le petit déjeuner 
pour tout le monde et après elle nous amène à l‘école par voiture. 
Ma sœur s‘appelle Sandrine, mes frères s‘appellent Paul et Martin. 
Paul a 20 ans et Martin a 18 ans. Ma sœur Sandrine a 16 ans. Paul est étudiant à l‘université Levy Mwanawasa. Il fait la 
pharmacologie. 
Ma sœur est élève à l‘école secondaire Monze. Elle est en troisième année secondaire. Elle apprend beaucoup de matières. 
Elle aime jouer au tennis avec ses amies et dessiner. 
Moi je suis en deuxième année, j‘étudie dans une école privée. 
Nous aimons passer du temps ensemble. Nous faisons des sorties le week-end. Nous allons au musée et au cinéma et nous 
jouons aussi aux jeux vidéo. Mon père nous aide à écrire les devoirs et ma mère nous raconte des histoires amusantes la 
nuit avant d‘aller dormir. 
J‘aime ma famille parce que tout le monde est gentil avec moi. Nous avons une maison confortable de quatre chambres à 
coucher, un salon de séjour, une salle à manger et une cuisine avec un jardin. 
TASKS                           
The tasks carter across various levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy from remembering to creating. 
1. 
Quelle est la profession du père de Chipo ?  
  
        (Retention-foundational)                                                                                                                         [1] 
2. 
Éxpliquez pourquoi le père travaille parfois le week-end.  
  
        (Inference- not simple recall)                                                                                                                   [2] 
3. 
Décrivez le rôle de la mère dans la famille. Donnez deux exemples. 
  
         (Analysing)                                                                                                                                               [2] 
4. Comparez l‘ȃge de Paul, Martin et Sandrine. Qui est l‘ainé ? 

--- PDF_PAGE 88 ---
- 72 - 
 
     (Analysing)                                                                                                                                                   [2] 
5. À votre avis, est-ce que la famille de Chipo est unie ? Justifiez votre réponse avec deux exemples du texte. 
     (Critical thinking)                                                                                                                                         [3] 
6. Imaginez que vous êtes Sandrine. Écrivez deux phrases pour décrire votre école et votre passe-temps préféré.  
     (Application + Creating)                                                                                                                              [3] 
7. Si vous étiez membre de cette famille, quelle activité préféreriez-vous faire le week-end ? Pourquoi ?  
    (Personalised communicative competence)                                                                                                  [2]  
 
Total Marks : 15 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
1. 
Il est médecin     
2. Il travaille parfois le week-end parce qu‘il y a des cas d‘urgence comme des opérations à l‘hôpital. 
3. La mère s‘occupe de la famille. Elle prépare le petit déjeuner et elle amène les enfants à l‘école/ Elle raconte des 
histoires la nuit/ Elle travaille aussi comme comptable. 
4. Paul a 20 ans, Martin a 18 ans et Sandrine a 16 ans. L‘ainé est Paul. 
5. Oui, la famille de Chipo est unie parce qu‘ils passent du temps ensemble le week-end et les parents aident les enfants 
avec leurs devoirs. 
     Ils font des sorties ensemble. 
     La mère raconte des histoires le soir. 
     Tout le monde est gentil avec Chipo. 
6. Je suis élève à l‘école secondaire de Monze et j‘apprends beaucoup de matières. 
    J‘aime jouer au tennis avec mes amies et dessiner pendants mon temps libre. 
7. Je préférerais aller au musée parce que j‘aime apprendre de nouvelles choses.  
 
 
 
EoC 1: Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts. 
 
 
B. Study the following information about a school and answer the questions that follow.   
Informations Générales 
• 
Nom                                : École Secondaire Kabwe 
• 
Adresse                           : BP 80430, Kabwe, Zambie. 
• 
Nombre d’élèves            : 800. 
• 
Nombre de professeurs : 50. 
Installations 
• 
Bâtiments                       : 5 
• 
Salles de classe              : 20 
• 
Laboratoires                 : 4 (physique, chimie, biologie, informatique). 
• 
Bibliothèques                : 2 
• 
Terrains de sport         :  3 (football, basket, tennis) 
Activités : 
• 
Sportives                       : football, basket, tennis, athlétisme. 
• 
Culturelles                    : musique, danse, théâtre. 

--- PDF_PAGE 89 ---
- 73 - 
 
• 
Clubs                             : anti-drogue, sciences, débat. 
 
Horaires 
• 
Heures de cours             : 7 h 30 - 13 h 30. 
• 
Heures de recréation     : 10 h 00 -10 h 30. 
• 
Jours d’activités             : lundi, activités culturelles/mercredi, activités de clubs/vendredi, activités sportives. 
 
Équipements 
• 
Ordinateurs                          :50 
• 
Projecteurs                           :6 
• 
Équipement de laboratoire : complet. 
 
TASKS  
1. Vous êtes un nouvel élève. Donnez deux informations importantes que vous devez connaître avant de vous inscrire dans 
cette école.                                                                                                                                      [2] 
2. Expliquez pourquoi cette école est bien organisée pour l‘apprentissage scientifique. Donnez deux raisons. [2] 
3. Si vous aimez lire et faire des recherches, quelles installations utiliserez-vous ? Pourquoi ?                         [2] 
4. Un élève aime la technologie et la communication digitale. Quels équipements peut-il utiliser ? Justifier votre réponse.      
[2] 
5. Comparez le nombre d‘élèves et de professeurs. Que pouvez-vous conclure ?                                              [2] 
6. Calculez la durée totale des cours par jour.                                                                                                     [2] 
7. Si vous aimez courir, quelle activité choisissez-vous et quel jour pouvez-vous la pratiquer ?                       [2] 
8. Proposez un nouveau club que l‘école pourrait ajouter et expliquer son importance.                                    [1] 
Total Marks : 15 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
1. 
Le nom de l‘école est École Secondaire Kabwe. 
         Il y a 800 élèves et 50 professeurs. 
2.  
 L‘école est bien organisée pour les sciences parce qu‘elle a quatre laboratoires (physique, chimie, biologie et 
informatique) et l‘équipement de laboratoire est complet.   
3. J‘utiliserai la bibliothèque parce qu‘il y a des livres pour lire et faire des recherches.  
4. Il peut utiliser les ordinateurs et les projecteurs parce qu‘ils sont utiles pour faire des recherches et des présentations.  
5. Il y a 800 élèves et 50 professeurs. Cela signifie qu‘il y a beaucoup plus d‘élèves que de professeurs. 
6. Les cours commencent à 7 h 30 et finissent à 13 h 30.  
    La durée totale est de 6 heures.  
7. Je choisis l‘athlétisme et je peux le pratiquer le vendredi pendant les activités sportives. 
8. L‘école pourrait ajouter un club d‘environnement pour protéger la nature et sensibiliser les élèves. 
 
Note: 
All tasks will require learners to think critically before responding. Various levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy, ranging from 
Remembering to Creating, will be applied.  
 
 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 90 ---
- 74 - 
 
 
EoC 1: Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts. 
 
 
C. LANGUAGE STRUCTURE AND TRANSLATION           [10 MARKS] 
(i) 
Language Structure       (5 Marks) 
Read each situation carefully and complete the sentence appropriately. 
1. 
Vous téléphonez à vos parents après six mois sans contact. Complétez la phrase correctement.         [1] 
Cela fait six mois que je ne ………………………… ai pas parlé. 
(les/leur/lui/i‘) 
Answer             : leur 
Cognitive Level: Application 
Why                  : Learner must apply knowledge of indirect object pronouns in authentic context. 
 
2. C‘est le jour de Noël. Complétez la phrase correctement.                                                                           [1] 
Avant d‟……………. à l‟église, nous prenons le petit déjeuner. 
(allons/aller/allez/allé) 
Answer              : aller 
Cognitive Level : Applying 
Why                   :  Requires understanding of infinitive after preposition « Avant de ». 
 
3. Les amies de Marie veulent connaître une information. Complétez la phrase.                                             [1] 
Elles veulent ………… où elle habite. 
(sait/savent/savoir/savons) 
Answer              : savoir 
Cognitive Level : Applying 
Why                   : Tests verb pattern after « vouloir ». 
 
4. Votre ami cherche quelque chose. Formulez correctement la question indirecte. 
Dis-moi, ………………. tu cherches.                                                                                                                  [1] 
(qu‟est-ce que /ce que/ que/ quoi) 
Answer               : ce que 
Cognitive Level : Analysing 
Why                    : Learner must distinguish between direct and indirect question structures.   
 
5. Vous êtes au restaurant et vous voulez commander poliment. Complétez. 
S‟il vous plaît, je ………… avoir un coca cola. 
(veux/voudrais/voudrai/voudrait)  
Answer    : voudrais 
Cognitive : Applying 
Why         : Tests pragmatic competence (conditional for politeness).     
                                                                                                         
(ii)  
Translation        (5 Marks) 
 You are addressing a new class as a teacher. Translate the following message into clear and appropriate French.  

--- PDF_PAGE 91 ---
- 75 - 
 
             1.          I am your teacher of French. I like discipline and order in my class.                                      [2] 
             2.  
It is very important to be quiet and to write your homework.                                               [2] 
3.  
Thank you very much.                                                                                                           [1] 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS  
           1. Je suis votre professeur de Français. J‘aime la discipline et l‘ordre dans ma classe.             
           2. C‘est très important de garder le silence et d‘écrire vos devoirs.                                           
           3. Merci beaucoup.       
                                                                                                                
 
EoC 2: Demonstrates mastery of written language conventions and transformations  
 
 
SECTION C 
 
WRITING                       [20 MARKS] 
Part 1. This task is compulsory 
Vous avez participé à une compétition de débat organisée par la banque ZANACO dans votre école. Vous avez remporté 
le premier prix de 50 000 Kwacha. 
Écrivez une lettre à votre professeur de français pour expliquer clairement et de manière réaliste comment vous allez 
utiliser cet argent. 
 (130 -150 mots). 
 
Part 2: This part contains two tasks. Candidates are required to choose and answer one. 
1. 
Votre ami(e) passe les vacances chez vous. Vous vous levez tôt le matin pendant qu‘il/elle dort encore et vous ne 
voulez pas le/la déranger. 
Écrivez un message pour lui/elle. Expliquez : 
• Où vous allez 
• Ce que vous allez faire 
• À quelle heure vous allez rentrer 
• Ce qu‘il/elle peut manger s‘il/ si elle a faim 
• Ce que vous allez faire le soir 
(130 -150 mots) 
 
2. 
Vous êtes ministre du tourisme en Zambie. Rédigez une publication sur Facebook pour inviter les touristes étrangers 
à visiter la Zambie. 
Dans votre texte, vous devez : 
• Inviter les touristes. 
• Décrire les principales attractions touristiques 
 Mentionner les activités économiques importantes 
 Parler des cérémonies traditionnelles 
 Présenter la nourriture zambienne 
 Expliquer les moyens de transport disponibles 
 Mentionner les langues locales 
(130 – 150 mots) 

--- PDF_PAGE 92 ---
- 76 - 
 
 
SCORING CRITERIA 
 
Criteria                                                            Marks          Descriptors 
1. 
Word limit                                                               1              Within range 
2. 
Task fulfilment & relevance                                    2             All required points addressed logically 
3. 
Organisation & Coherence                                      2            Clear structure, logic flow, paragraphing  
4. 
Language accuracy (Grammar & tense control       3            Correct use of structures 
5. 
Vocabulary range & appropriateness                       1            Appropriate and varied vocabulary 
6.          Spelling & Punctuation                                              1            Accurate spelling and punctuation 
Total Marks: 10 
Note: 
All composition tasks will be designed to promote critical and independent thinking. In alignment with Revised Bloom‘s 
Taxonomy, the questions will assess a range of cognitive skills, progressing from lower-order skills (Remembering and 
Understanding) to higher-order skills (Applying, Analysing, Evaluating, and Creating). This approach will ensure that 
the assessment measures not only linguistic competence but also learner‘s ability to organise, justify, and communicate 
ideas effectively.   
 
