
--- PDF_PAGE 71 ---
- 55 - 
 
Chapter 6: Geography – 3014  
1. 
Construct 
Analyses spatial patterns, human-environmental interactions and applies geographical tools and techniques 
to interpret information and promote sustainable use of environmental resources. 
2. 
Elements of Construct 
Candidates will be assessed on various School Based Assessment tasks which will be based on the 
following five Elements of Construct (EoC): 
EoC1 Applies map reading skills to understand spatial relationships in real life 
 Interprets maps to understand geographical relations such as time and angle of elevation in 
order to effectively navigate the physical world.  
EoC2 Demonstrates understanding of earth's natural processes and their effects  
 Understands the earth‘s natural processes and their effect on the environment and humanity in 
order to identify strategies for mitigating and adapting to environmental changes. 
EoC3 Understands demographic dynamics and its relationship with the environment and 
humanity in order to identify strategies for sustainable development 
 Understands population dynamics and connectivity to nature in order to identify strategies to 
manage demographic dynamics and promoting sustainable development 
EoC4 Demonstrates understanding of resource utilisation and sustainability 
 Understands the use of natural resources and apply knowledge of sustainable practices to real-
world resource management for economic and social benefits to humanity. 
EoC5     Conducts geographical inquiry using appropriate research methods 
     Applies ability to carry out geographical inquiry and investigate the impact of human   
activities on the environment to address real-world problems/challenges 
3. 
Test Design 
The Geography examination for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level will consist of two 
components; component 1 and 2.  
Component 1 will be School Based Assessment (SBA) which will be set and scored at school. It will be 
administered in Form 2 and 3. 
 Component 2 will be the Final Examination which will be set and scored by the Examinations council of 
Zambia at the end of Form 4. SBA will be weighted 30% and Final Examinations will be weighted 70%. 
Summary of the Test Design for Geography Components 1 and 2 
Component Name 
Code 
Level 
Number of 
Test Items 
/Tasks 
Duration 
Total Marks  
School Based Assessment - 
Component 1 
 
3014/1 
Form 2 
5 
1 year 
100 
Form 3 
5 
1 year  
100 
Final Examination - 
Component 2 
3014/2 
Form 4 
8 
2 hrs  
100 
Total                                                                                                                                                      300 
3.1 
Structure 
3.1.1 School Based Assessment (SBA) - Component 1  

--- PDF_PAGE 72 ---
- 56 - 
 
The SBA component 1 will assess leaners using tasks based on the Five (5) Elements of 
Constructs. It will comprise ten (10) tasks; five (5) at Form 2 and five (5) at form 3. The tasks 
at each form level will carry 100 marks giving a total of 200 marks.  
 SBA will be set and scored at school level. The structure of the SBA tasks will be 
determined by the type of task and by the class teacher.  
3.1.2 Final Examination - Component 2:  
The Final Examination will have four (4) Sections namely; A, B, C and D. The component 
will have two items for each section with a total of   8 items and learners will choose 4. Each 
item will have its own scenario or stimulus where the tasks will be based on the 4 EoC, 
namely; EoC1, EoC2, EoC 3 and EoC4 as prescribed herein. The Final Examination will be 
written in Form 4 and it will be set and scored by the Examinations Council of Zambia.  
3.2 
Test Content 
The test content for both Component 1 and 2 will be considered in terms of types of tasks and items, 
level of difficulty and syllabus coverage. 
 
3.2.1 
SBA:  Component 1 
School Based Assessment will consist of 10 tasks that will include: assignments, field trips 
(work) /case study, field project, quiz, class discussions, presentation, class tests and end of 
term tests and end of year tests 
(i) Assignments: they will have a title, main body (details of the findings on topic) and 
conclusions. 
(ii) Field project/case study: Involves visiting places, finding information from people 
around that area or from the published sources and write a report  
(iii) Quizzes: Teachers preparing tasks and learners put in groups and respond or do the 
tasks. This helps learners to master certain concepts.  
(iv) Discussion and Presentations: Learners are organised in groups and given different 
topics to discuss and present in class. 
(vi) Class tests /end of topic tests/ end of term tests and end of year tests.  
Types of Tasks 
SBA tasks should consist of subjective tasks which will be structured semi structured, 
unstructured and essays. The tasks will be in form of written assignment, Discussions, 
quizzes and simple projects from all the specific competences and Elements of Construct 
for Religious Education. 
 
 
 
Research Work 
The candidates will be expected to apply knowledge and skills of research work. They 
need to show all the procedure in report writing 
3.2.2 
Final Examination: Component 2  
Component 2 will have 4 Sections A, B, C and D. each section will have 2 items each 
giving a total of 8 items. Candidates will choose one (1) from each of the sections.  
Section A will cover test items-based on map reading literacy in real life situation; 
Section B will cover the demonstration of understanding the earth's natural processes and 
their effects; 

--- PDF_PAGE 73 ---
- 57 - 
 
 Section C will cover appreciation of demography and its relationship with environment; 
and  
Section D will cover demonstration of understanding of the resource utilisation and 
sustainability. Each test item will carry 25 marks.  
Types of Items  
 
 
Semi-structured items  
In this type, the candidates will be expected to provide one word, phrase, figures, 
definitions or comparisons, contrasts, calculations etc. 
 
Essay items 
Candidate will be expected to write/provide responses in a prose form. They have to write 
their points for a given topic clearly in a logical manner. 
 
3.3 
Syllabus Coverage 
School Based Assessment tasks and Final Examination items will be based on the content from the 
Geography Syllabus for the Secondary Education Ordinary Level developed by Curriculum 
Development Centre (CDC), 2024.  
The School Based Assessment and Final Examination tasks will be aligned to the key competences 
such as analytical thinking, Critical thinking, citizenship, collaboration creativity and innovation, 
communication, digital literacy, problem solving, entrepreneurship, financial literacy, 
environmental sustainability and emotional intelligence.  
The items and tasks will be linked to related topics and competences which have been grouped into 
Elements of Construct.  
The specific competences are reflected in the SBA Framework, Test Framework and Test 
Specification table produced by the ECZ. These assessment tools will ensure validity, reliability and 
comparability of the assessments from year to year.   
3.4 
Level of Difficulty 
The level of difficulty for test items in Components 1 and 2 will assess the level of competences 
acquired through knowledge acquisition and application of skills across all the six levels of the 
revised Bloom‘s taxonomy.  
SBA - Component 1: The application of skills will be assessed mainly through applying, analysing, 
evaluating and creating. Real life problems will be presented in different scenarios based on 
Elements of Construct and then tasks given to interpret the scenarios in order to solve problem.  
Final Examination - Component 2: The acquisition of knowledge will be assessed through 
understanding of concepts and applying them to real life scenarios from Elements of Construct in 
order to respond to the problem.   
Both components will be Competence-Based Assessments (CBA) which will be presented in real 
life scenarios. Candidates will need to apply critical thinking creativity and problem-solving skills 
in order to come up with expected responses. 
The levels of difficulty for test items and tasks will be determined by the following factors: 
(i) 
The complexity of the scenario or real-life situation on a given Element of Construct that a 
candidate will be expected to respond to.    
(ii) 
The subject knowledge and skills required to respond to the real-life problems and challenges 
(level of competence). 

--- PDF_PAGE 74 ---
- 58 - 
 
(iii) 
The complexity and number of cognitive processes required to generate responses to test 
items and tasks. 
(iv) 
The level of analytical and critical thinking involved to arrive at a response. 
 
(v) 
The extent to which a candidate will have to strategise in order to respond to the items and 
tasks. 
3.5 
 
4. 
Scoring Criteria 
4.1 
Component 1 
SBA for Geography will be set (organised) and scored by teachers at school level.  
Guidelines on how to award marks for Field project and other tasks are provided in the ‗Guidelines 
for School Based Assessment‘.  
4.2 
Final Examination: Component 2 
Before marking of Component 2 begins, coordination meeting will be held to harmonise the scoring 
rubrics and scoring guide for that particular year.  
The scoring will be based on the relevance of the responses to the items by candidates and will be 
awarded one full mark for a fully developed point whilst an undeveloped point will be awarded half 
mark. Candidates will be expected to answer questions in essay/prose form. Candidates will also be 
required to give one-word response/phrases where applicable. The questions range from lower order 
to higher order thinking skill levels 
5. 
Notes and Guidelines 
5.1     SBA will be compulsory and will carry 200 marks.  
5.2    All SBA tasks including Geography Field project will be administered at school levels; therefore, 
teachers should supervise candidates closely as they are engaged in SBA tasks and during the field 
research and report writing for Geography field project. 
5.3 
Plagiarised Geography Project shall be disqualified 
5.4 
The Geography Field Project should be administered to  Form 2 and Form 3  and it will be as 
follows: 
(i) 
Form 2 Term 1   Theoretical aspect of the project 
(ii) 
Form 2 Term 2 Formulation of the project proposal (Title, aim of the project, objectives and 
methodology of the study). 
(iii) 
Form 3 Term 1  Data collection  
(iv) 
Form 3 term 2 - Data analysis 
(v) 
Form 3 Term 3  Report writing and finalisation 
For submission of marks, see general guidelines. 
5.5    For General Certificate of Education there will have an alternative paper to SBA 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 75 ---
- 59 - 
 
6. 
Exemplar Test Items 
Component 1 
Example 1 
EoC1 Applies map reading literacy and understanding spatial relationships in real life 
Item  1 
Many people in your community are wondering how the sun always rises from the east and sets in the west daily and yet 
no one has ever seen it coming back from the west. They have seen may days and nights, many seasons, and experience 
changes in climate patterns. They do not know that it‘s because of the Earth‘s movements that cause all these things. 
As an astronaut who has studied the Solar System, they have approached you to explain to how the sun rises from the 
same direction and sets in the opposite direction every day. 
Tasks 
Based on this scenario, 
(a) 
Identify the main components of the solar system.  
 [8 marks] 
(b)Explain to the community how the Earth’s s rotation and revolution cause: 
i) Day and night 
ii) Variation in seasons 
 [8Marks] 
(c)Relate the variation in seasons to activities or challenges experienced by people in your community (e.g., farming, 
festivals, water availability). 
(d) 
Suggest why understanding these movements is important.  
 [9 marks] 
Total:  25 Marks 
Answers 
(a) Identify and describe elements found in the solar system. 
The Sun 
 Description: A G2-class main sequence star at the centre of the solar system. 
 Importance: Contains 99.86% of the system‘s total mass, provides light and heat, and drives gravitational forces 
that keep all other bodies in orbit. 
Planets 
 Inner (Terrestrial) Planets: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars. 
o Made mostly of rock and metal. 
o Smaller, denser, and closer to the Sun. 
 Outer (Gas/Ice Giants): Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune. 
o Composed mainly of gas (hydrogen, helium) or ices (water, methane, ammonia). 
o Much larger, with ring systems and many moons. 
 
Moons (Natural Satellites) 
 Orbit planets and vary greatly in size and composition. 
 Examples: Earth‘s Moon, Jupiter‘s Ganymede (largest moon in the solar system), Saturn‘s Titan (with thick 
atmosphere). 
 Provide insights into planetary formation and sometimes host subsurface oceans that may support life. 
Asteroids 
 Rocky remnants from the early solar system. 
 Found mainly in the Asteroid Belt between Mars and Jupiter. 
 Range from small rocks to dwarf-planet-sized bodies like Ceres. 
Comets 
 Made of ice, dust, and rock. 
 Originate from the Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud. 
 When near the Sun, their ice vaporizes, creating a glowing coma and tail. 
Cosmic Dust & Interplanetary Matter 
 Tiny particles left over from the solar system‘s formation. 
 Contribute to phenomena like zodiacal light (a faint glow seen in the night sky). 
 Important for understanding the chemical evolution of the solar system. 
(a)  Relate the impact of Earth‘s rotation and revolution to day and night and varying seasons and on life on Earth.   

--- PDF_PAGE 76 ---
- 60 - 
 
(b)  Earth‘s Rotation 
 The Earth spins on its axis once every ~24 hours. 
 Effects on Natural Phenomena: 
 Day and Night: Rotation exposes different parts of Earth to sunlight, creating the daily cycle. 
 Coriolis Effect: Deflects winds and ocean currents, shaping global weather patterns. 
 Time Zones: Human societies divide the globe into zones to standardize time based on rotation. 
 Effects on Human Activities: 
 Daily Routines: Work, school, and social life are structured around the day-night cycle. 
 Navigation & Aviation: Pilots and sailors account for Coriolis forces when planning routes. 
 Energy Use: Electricity demand rises during daylight hours and falls at night. 
Earth’s Revolution 
 Definition: The Earth orbits the Sun once every ~365 days, tilted at 23.5° on its axis. 
 Effects on Natural Phenomena: 
 Seasons: Tilt + revolution cause varying sunlight intensity, leading to summer, winter, spring, and autumn. 
 Climate Patterns: Revolution influences rainfall, temperature, and agricultural cycles. 
 Solstices & Equinoxes: Mark key points in the year when day length changes significantly. 
 Effects on Human Activities: 
 Agriculture: Farmers plan planting and harvesting around seasonal changes. 
 Festivals & Culture: Many traditions (e.g., harvest festivals, solstice celebrations) are tied to Earth‘s revolution. 
 Tourism & Economy: Seasonal weather affects travel, clothing industries, and energy consumption. 
(c)  Suggest reasons why understanding these movements is important  
 Navigation & Orientation in Space: 
o Earth‘s rotation and revolution determine how spacecraft launch windows are calculated. 
o Astronauts must align missions with Earth‘s position relative to the Sun and other planets. 
 Timing of Missions: 
o Rotation affects the timing of rocket launches (to take advantage of Earth‘s spin for extra velocity). 
o Revolution influences when missions to other planets are possible (e.g., Mars launch windows occur only 
when Earth and Mars align favourably). 
 Day/Night Cycles in Orbit: 
o Astronauts on the International Space Station experience ~16 sunrises and sunsets per day due to Earth‘s 
rotation. Understanding this helps regulate sleep, work schedules, and health. 
 Climate & Weather Studies: 
o Rotation explains global wind patterns and ocean currents, while revolution explains seasonal changes. These 
are vital for predicting climate and environmental shifts. 
 Planetary Comparisons: 
o Studying Earth‘s movements helps scientists compare with other planets (e.g., Venus rotates slowly, Mars has 
similar seasons). This deepens knowledge of planetary evolution. 
 Space Exploration Planning: 
o Revolution determines how Earth‘s position changes relative to other celestial bodies, which is essential for 
plotting interplanetary trajectories. 
 Astronomical Observations: 
o Rotation affects how telescopes track stars and planets (since Earth‘s spin makes the sky appear to move). 
Revolution changes which constellations are visible at different times of year. 
(d) 
Suggest why understanding these movements is important. 
 It predicts weather patterns: Earth‘s rotation influences wind patterns, ocean currents affecting weather  
 Agricultural planning: Farmers use seasonal changes to plant/harvest crops  
 Navigation: Pilots, sailors use sun position (affected by rotation/revolution) for direction  
 Day light saving adjustments: Time changes align with daylight hours  
Level of difficulty: Task 1:  Remembering Task 2 Understanding Task 3 Evaluating.  

--- PDF_PAGE 77 ---
- 61 - 
 
Specific Competences: Apply knowledge of earth movements in different situations. 
Key Competence: Creativity and innovation   
 
Example 2 
EoC2: Demonstrates understanding of earth's natural processes and their effects 
Item 2:  
The residents of Siavonga noticed the changes of weather pattern over a decade now. As a result, the water levels in the 
streams and local dam have dropped. The place has also become hot and uncomfortable for the resident to live there. The 
people in the area have complained about the situation and the government is exploring strategies to mitigate the 
problems affecting people and their animals. No reference to the picture 
                           
                                Picture showing part of the Siavonga Community  
 
 
 
Tasks: 
(a)  Identify and explain factors that have caused changes in weather pattern in Siavonga.  
[7 marks] 
(b) Describe how these changes in climate pattern have affected the environment and the people of Siavonga. [8 marks] 
(c) If you were an official in the Ministry of Environment and Green Economy, suggest practical solutions that the you 
could employ to reduce the impacts of climate change in Siavonga.  
[10 marks] 
ANSWERS 
(a) 
Factors Causing Climate Change 
 Burning of fossil fuels like coal, oil and gas. 
 Deforestation and land use changes like cutting down forests reduces the Earth‘s ability to absorb CO₂,  
 Rapid Urbanisation & Industrialization e.g. Expanding cities lead to more energy consumption, waste 
production, and pollution, all contributing to climate change. 
 Agriculture and livestock e.g. Methane emissions from agriculture and waste  
 Transportation emissions e.g. vehicles and planes 
 Waste management e.g. landfills and incineration 
 Population growth and consumption patterns 
 Ozone layer depletion due to CFCs, HCFCs etc. 
(b)  
Effects of Climate Change 
 Changes in growing and seasons and low crop yields. 
 Increased risk of water-borne diseases 
 Displacement and migration of communities 
 Loss of livelihoods and economic instability 

--- PDF_PAGE 78 ---
- 62 - 
 
 Impacts on mental health and well-being 
 Increased risk of heat stress and heat-related illnesses 
 Shifts in ecosystems and wildlife habitats 
 Rising temperatures and extreme weather events e.g. droughts, heat waves. 
 Water scarcity 
 Loss of biodiversity 
 Health Impacts: Increased heat waves and flooding spread diseases like malaria and cholera, affecting public 
health. 
(c)  
Solutions to Climate Change 
 Renewable Energy Expansion like invest in solar farms and mini-grids for rural electrification as Zambia has 
abundant sunshine, making solar a sustainable alternative to hydropower (which is vulnerable to droughts). 
 Diversify Energy Sources e.g. Reduce reliance on hydropower by adding wind and biomass energy. This helps 
stabilize electricity supply during droughts. 
 Afforestation & Reforestation e.g. Plant trees to restore degraded land and absorb CO₂. Community-driven tree 
planting programs can also provide timber and fruit. 
 Sustainable Agriculture e.g. Promote climate-smart farming like crop rotation, conservation tillage, and 
drought-resistant seeds. These reduces vulnerability to erratic rainfall. 
 Water Harvesting & Irrigation e.g. Build rainwater harvesting systems and small-scale irrigation schemes. This 
ensures food security during dry spells. 
 Waste Management & Recycling e.g. Introduce composting, recycling, and biogas production. Reduces 
methane emissions from landfills and provides alternative energy. 
 Public Transport & Green Mobility e.g. Expand affordable bus systems and cycling infrastructure in Lusaka 
and other cities. 
 Education & Awareness e.g. Integrate climate change education into schools and community programs. This 
also empowers citizens to adopt sustainable practices. 
 Policy & Governance like Strengthen enforcement of environmental laws (e.g., against illegal logging). Align 
national policies with the Paris Agreement and regional climate strategies. 
 Climate-Resilient Infrastructure e.g. Build flood defences, drainage systems, and climate-proof roads. This will 
Protect communities from extreme weather events. 
 Support for Smallholder Farmers e.g. Provide microfinance and insurance schemes to help farmers adapt. This 
encourages adoption of sustainable practices without risking livelihoods. 
 Community-Based Natural Resource Management e. g. Empower local communities to manage forests, 
fisheries, and wildlife sustainably. Reduces overexploitation and protects biodiversity. 
 International Partnerships & Funding. Access climate finance from global funds (e.g., Green Climate Fund). 
Level of difficulty: (a) understanding (b) applying (c) Creating.  
Specific competence: Analyse climate change  
Key Competence: Analytical thinking  
 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 79 ---
- 63 - 
 
Example 3 
EoC3: Appreciates demography and its relationship with environment 
Item 3  
Shakalyabanyama Village in Central Province was once a small agricultural village with a population of 50,000 people. Its 
fertile land, mild climate, and proximity to a new industrial hub attracted investors and workers. Within just 15 years, the 
population rapidly increased to 600,000 residents. Now there is high demand for land as migrants bought much of the land 
and the local people have nowhere to grow crops.  
 
                                     Picture showing part of Shakalabanya (Village) Community  
 
 
Tasks 
(a)  Identify factors that led to the population increase of Shakalyabanyama Village.  
[8 marks] 
(b)  As a demographer, what negative effects of rapid population increase are affecting the people of Shakalyabanyama 
Village.  
                                                                                  [10 marks] 
(c)  What actions would you take to help address the negative effects that are affecting the people of Shakalyabanyama 
Village as a result of rapid population increase in the area?  
 [7 marks] 
ANSWERS 
(a) 
Factors that led to population of Shakalyabanyama skyrocket  
 The industries in the areas attract job seekers leading to migration  
 Industries have encouraged urbanization that attract development offering better living standards  
 Improved infrastructure such as roads, housing etc attractive to residents  
 Industrial growth stimulates economies that attracts more people 
 Access to services such as education and health care attract families  
 Good fertile soils attract many people especially farmers 
 Community development e,g, growth of local businesses , social amenities  
 Improved healthcare services people have led to high life expectant and reduced infant mortality rate. 
 Cultural beliefs and values that supports large families as children are seen as assets 
(b)  
Negative effects   
 Shortages of safe and clean water: The local reservoir, designed for 50,000 people, now struggles to meet 
demand. 
 Traffic congestion: Roads built for a small village are overwhelmed. 
 Healthcare strain: Hospitals face overcrowding, with long waiting times and limited resources. 
 Housing crisis: Rapid demand has driven up rents, forcing low-income families into informal settlements. 
 Environmental stress: Forests and farmland are cleared for housing, reducing biodiversity and increasing 
pollution. 

--- PDF_PAGE 80 ---
- 64 - 
 
 Waste management issues: Garbage collection systems cannot keep up, leading to illegal dumping. 
 Education gaps: Schools are overcrowded, with classrooms holding twice the intended number of students. 
Universities and colleges opened campuses, attracting young people. 
 Social Impact Rising inequality between wealthy newcomers and long-time residents. 
 Increased crime rates due to unemployment among those left behind by the industrial shift. 
 Cultural tensions as diverse groups settle in the area, sometimes clashing over resources and traditions 
(c)  
Key Solutions to Rapid Population Growth 
 Urban planning: implement zoning regulations develop infrastructure to provide adequate housing  
 Encourage eco friendly practices and green spaces and resource management 
 Involve local communities in planning and decision making  
 Adaptive management: monitor and adjust strategies as population grows 
 Decision making should be based on empirical data, research to inform policy and planning.  
 Family Planning & Reproductive Health 
 access to contraception and reproductive health services. 
 Encourage smaller family sizes through awareness campaigns. 
 Empower women with education and healthcare, which directly reduces fertility rates. 
 Universal education, especially for girls, delays marriage and childbirth. 
 Public campaigns on the impact of overpopulation help communities make informed choices. 
 Education improves employment opportunities, reducing reliance on large families for income. 
 Urban Planning & Infrastructure 
 Develop sustainable cities with efficient housing, transport, and sanitation. 
 Invest in green spaces, renewable energy, and waste management to reduce environmental strain. 
 Prevent overcrowding by decentralizing economic opportunities to rural areas. 
 Economic & Policy Measures 
 Create job opportunities to reduce poverty-driven population growth. 
 Implement progressive policies that incentivize smaller families. 
 Strengthen social safety nets so families don‘t rely on many children for old-age support. 
 Resource Management 
 Promote sustainable agriculture to feed growing populations. 
 Encourage water conservation and renewable energy use. 
 Reduce consumption inequality so resources are shared more fairly. 
 Health care Improvements 
 Reduce infant mortality rates - families often have fewer children when survival rates improve. 
 Provide maternal health services to ensure safe pregnancies and births. 
Level of Difficulty: (a) Understanding (b) applying (c) Creating. 
Specific competence: Address the challenges of Rapid population 
Key competences: Problem solving  
Example 4 
EoC4 Demonstrates understanding of resource utilisation and sustainability 
Scenario 
Zambia is known for its rich natural beauty and cultural heritage. Tourists flock to see a variety of attractions that range 
from flora to fauna. However, when, they come to Zambia, they do not see all the animals and plants they expected to see. 
(As a government agent,  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 81 ---
- 65 - 
 
 
 
 
 
One of the National Part in Zambia  
 
 
Tasks 
Using the scenario: 
(a)   Explain why the number of wild animals and plants reduced.  
 [5 marks] 
(b)  What is the impact of wildlife scarcity on Zambia‘s Tourism?  
 [5 marks] 
 (c)  Describing challenges facing the tourism industry.  
                [5 marks] 
(d)  Suggesting solutions to overcome these challenges.  
                [5 marks] 
ANSWERS 
(a)  
Explain why the number of wild animals and plants have reduced. 
 Habitat loss: human activities e.g. agriculture, settlements and infrastructure development have destroyed 
habitats for animals. 
 Poaching and human wildlife conflicts have reduced animal population and made them more illusive  
 Climate change e.g changes in rainfall pattern, temperature affect animal migration pattern and habitat.  
 Inadequate wild life management strategies have led to decline in animal population  
 Limited access to wildlife areas due to poor road infrastructure making it difficult for tourists to reach wildlife 
areas and view animals  
 Seasonal variation, some tourist may visit during the time of low animal activities  
 Competition from other economic activities such as agriculture, mining, compete for space and resources. 
(b) 
What is the impact of scarcity wildlife on Tourism industry in Zambia? 
 Reduces tourism arrivals leading to the loss of revenue 
 Reduced tourist activities affect the local economies and livelihood of the local people  
 Leads to job losses especially in hospitality industries, transport and tour operators  
 Damage the Zambia‘s reputation as top wildlife destination deterring potential tourists  
 Loss of competitive advantage in the region and global market  
 Reduced investment in tourism  
 Discourage investment in tourist related industries such as tour operation and hospitality industry 
 Biodiversity loss due to inadequate conservation efforts 
(c) 
 Suggesting solutions to overcome these challenges. 
 Invest in eco-friendly infrastructure 
 Strengthen anti-poaching efforts and wildlife management 
 Promote reforestation and habitat restoration 
 Support climate-resilient tourism 

--- PDF_PAGE 82 ---
- 66 - 
 
 Foster community-led tourism initiatives 
 Implement effective waste management  
 Develop sustainable tourism plans 
 Provide training and capacity building 
 Encourage responsible tourism practices 
 Foster public-private partnerships 
-Develop and promote eco-labs and sustainable tour operators 
 Implement certification programmes for sustainable tourism 
 Support conservation efforts through tourism revenue 
 Engage local communities in tourism-decision making. 
The level of difficulty: (a) applying (b) analysing, (c) Creating.  
Specific competence: Provide Solutions to the challenges of tourism 
 The key competence: Problem Solving  
 

--- PDF_PAGE 83 ---
- 67 - 
 
Chapter 7: French Language – 1120  
1. 
Construct 
Demonstrates proficient use of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in real-life situations, 
adapting to audience and purpose to communicate effectively and support life-long learning.  
2. 
Elements of Construct 
Assessment of candidates will be based on the following four (4) Elements of Construct (EoC): 
EoC 1: Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts 
 Reads and comprehends various types of continuous and non-continuous texts. 
 Interprets vocabulary and expressions accurately, considering context, audience and purpose. 
 Identifies and summarises main ideas and supporting details. 
 Translates texts accurately from the source language into the target language, preserving 
meaning, tone and intent.  
EoC 2: Demonstrates mastery of written language conventions and transformations  
 Spells words correctly with orthographic accuracy. 
 Applies grammatical and syntactic rules accurately in sentence construction. 
 Uses appropriate punctuation to enhance clarity and meaning. 
 Manipulates and transforms written language structures while maintaining grammatical 
accuracy and meaning. 
EoC 3: Understands and interprets spoken information 
 Identifies main ideas and supporting details in spoken texts. 
 Analyses the speaker‘s purpose, tone and intended message. 
 Follows instructions, directions and questions accurately and responds appropriately. 
 Interprets spoken information from the source language into the target language while 
maintaining meaning and intent. 
EoC 4:    Produces ideas, thoughts and opinions through spoken language 
 Organises ideas logically and coherently.  
 Speaks clearly, audibly and fluently. 
 Uses appropriate vocabulary, expressions and tone suited to purpose, context and audience.  
 Demonstrates accuracy in pronunciation and grammatical structures.  
3. 
Test Design 
The French Language Examination for School Certificate of Education Ordinary Level will consist of two 
components: Component 1 will be the School Based Assessment (SBA), and Component 2 will be the 
Final Examination. The weighting of the School Based Assessment (SBA) and the Final Examination will 
be in the ratio of 40:60. The test design for the French Language examination is summarised as follows: 
Test Design for Component 1 and 2 
Component Name 
Code 
Assessment 
Level 
Number of 
Tasks/Test Items  
Duration 
Marks 
allocation 
School Based Assessment 
- Component 1 
1120/1 
Form 2 
 
5 
1 year 
90 
Form 3 
 
5 
1 year 
90 
 
Form 2-3 
1 Project 
2 years 
20 
Final Examination 
Component 2 
1120/2 
Form 4 
 
10 
2 Hours 
60 

--- PDF_PAGE 84 ---
- 68 - 
 
 
3.1 Structure 
3.1.1 
School Based Assessment - Component 1 
School Based Assessment (SBA) shall be conducted from Form 2 to Form 3 and shall 
constitute an integral component of the teaching and learning process. SBA tasks will be 
drawn from all the four (4) Elements of Construct and shall include classwork, homework, 
assignments, oral presentations and projects.  
3.1.2 
Final Examination - Component 2 
The Final Examination will be based on two Elements of Construct, namely, EoC 1: Reads, 
interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts and EoC 2: 
Demonstrates mastery of written language conventions and transformations. The paper will 
comprise three sections: A, B and C. 
 
Section A: Reading Comprehension  
               Reading Comprehension will comprise 2 items which will have 2 scenarios in form of 
passages. The passages will be non-continuous and continuous passages. Candidates will be 
expected to answer both. 
               Passages used in the examination will be adapted to the candidate‘s level of competence as 
prescribed in the syllabus. Candidates will be required to read texts written in French and 
respond to questions based on the given scenarios. Each continuous text will include semi-
structured tasks, weighted at 15 marks. The length of the reading passage will range from 
250 to 300 words.  
               Non-continuous texts will be organised in a non-linear manner, with information presented 
in the form of timetables, maps, diagrams, graphs, picture series, and similar formats. The 
visual presentations will contain sufficient information to elicit responses and will include 
semi-structured tasks, weighted at 15 marks.  
Section B: Language Structure and Translation 
This section will have two parts; 
Part 1: Language Structure 
This part shall assess candidates‘ competence in performing a range of grammatical tasks 
derived from real-life situations. The part shall comprise five items, each designed to 
evaluate the accurate and appropriate use of grammatical structures in context. 
In line with competence-based curriculum, items shall assess candidates‘ ability to apply 
grammar functionally rather than in isolation. Tasks shall therefore be contextualised and 
linked to everyday communication. 
Part 2: Translation 
This part shall assess candidates‘ competence to translate from French to English and vice 
versa. Assessment items will consist of sentences and short texts derived from real-life 
contexts. For instance, candidates may be required to translate a community notice from 
English into French for a foreign national intending to settle in Zambia, or from French into 
English to facilitate local comprehension. 
Section C: Writing 
This section shall comprise two parts: unguided composition and guided composition. In the 
unguided composition part, candidates shall attempt one compulsory item. In the guided 
composition part, candidates shall be presented with two items and shall be required to 
choose and answer one. 

--- PDF_PAGE 85 ---
- 69 - 
 
Both the Unguided and Guided Composition parts will each carry a total of 10 marks. 
Writing tasks will be based on the following text types: 
(i) 
 Informal and formal letter writing 
(ii) 
 Narrative writing 
(iii) Descriptive writing 
(iv) 
Argumentative writing 
(v) 
Curriculum vitae writing  
(vi) 
Profile writing 
3.2.  Test Content 
           The SBA at Form 2 and 3 will assess all competences outlined in the syllabus at either form level. 
The Final Examination will include topics from the syllabus from Forms 1 to 4. 
3.2.1  Types of Tasks and Items 
           Items in both School Based Assessment (SBA) and the Final Examination shall comprise a 
combination of objective and subjective types. 
(i) The question types to be used in the School Based Assessment (SBA) shall include 
multiple-choice questions, true or false items, matching items, short response questions, 
essay questions, and short answer questions, among others. 
(ii) The Final Examination shall comprise structured, semi-structured, and unstructured 
items including short response questions, completion of sentences, and essay type 
items. 
3.2.2  
Level of Difficulty 
The level of questions in both the Final Examination and School Based Assessment (SBA) 
of the French Language will be based on the Elements of Construct and will vary in 
complexity to ensure balanced coverage across lower-order, middle-order and higher-order 
cognitive domain of the revised Bloom‘s Taxonomy.  
Assessment items shall be scenario based and designed to require candidates to apply their 
knowledge, skills, values and attitudes to solve real-life communicative problems. 
The level of difficulty of the Final Examination and SBA items shall be determined by the 
following factors: 
(i) The depth and breadth of the subject knowledge and language skills required to address 
the given scenario. 
(ii) The level of cognitive complexity involved in processing and responding to the task. 
(iii) The degree of abstract reasoning and critical thinking required.  
(iv) The number and complexity of cognitive processes necessary to generate appropriate 
and meaningful responses. 
3.2.3 
Syllabus Coverage 
The Final Examination and School Based Assessment (SBA) shall be based on the French 
Language Syllabus (CDC,2024) for Forms 1 to 4. The assessment shall focus on the 
development and evaluation of key competences, such as communication, analytical 
thinking, citizenship, collaboration, problem-solving and critical thinking. 
Assessment tasks shall be designed to integrate these competences within authentic 
language contexts to promote meaningful learning and practical application. To ensure 
validity, reliability, consistency and comparability across examination cycles, the Test 
Specification, Test Framework and School Based Assessment (SBA) Framework shall be 

--- PDF_PAGE 86 ---
- 70 - 
 
applied. These tools shall guide and standardise development and moderation of test items 
and SBA tasks. 
The following table indicates how the syllabus has been summarised per Element of 
Construct, per assessment component and the cognitive levels of the revised Bloom‘s 
Taxonomy. 
Syllabus Coverage and Cognitive Levels 
Elements of 
Construct 
COMPONENT 1 
COMPONENT 2 
Syllabus 
Coverage 
Cognitive Level 
EoC 1 
Reading 
Comprehension  
Reading 
Comprehension  
 
Reading and 
demonstrating 
understanding of 
different types of texts 
and summarising given 
real-life texts or 
passages. 
Remembering, 
Understanding, 
Applying, 
Analysing, 
Evaluating and 
Creating. 
EoC 2 
Writing 
Writing 
Producing different 
types and styles of 
writing by using a 
range of grammatical 
structures. 
Remembering, 
understanding, 
Applying, 
Analysing, 
Evaluating and 
Creating. 
EoC 3 
Listening  
 
 
Listening to spoken 
passages, texts, 
dialogues, and audio 
recordings and 
responding to 
questions. 
Remembering, 
Understanding, 
and Applying. 
 
EoC 4 
Speaking 
 
Making oral 
presentations on 
various situations and 
responding 
appropriately to 
questions. 
Remembering, 
Understanding 
and Applying 
4. 
Scoring Criteria 
4.1  
School Based Assessment – Component 1 
SBA tasks will be prepared and scored by the subject teacher at the school. To ensure tasks are 
pitched at the appropriate level of difficulty, teachers will use the SBA Framework.  
Teachers will use the scoring guides for each SBA task to ensure consistency, fairness, and accuracy 
when evaluating learners‘ performance on class tests, projects, practical work, presentations, 
assignments, and other structured activities. 
4.2  
Final Examination – Component 2 
Before scoring of the Final Examination commences, a coordination meeting will be held to 
harmonise the scoring guide for the particular year. Furthermore, continuous monitoring of scoring 
will be conducted during the scoring process to ensure that examiners maintain consistent standards 
by adhering to the approved scoring guide. 
5. 
Notes and Guidelines 
5.1 
Candidates will be required to sit for both Component 1 and Component 2 in order to be graded in 
the subject. If a candidate absents themselves from either component, no partial marks shall be 
awarded. 
5.2 
Standard French shall be used in responding to the examination questions. 

--- PDF_PAGE 87 ---
- 71 - 
 
5.3  
Dictionaries, textbooks, and any other reference materials shall not be permitted in the examination 
room. 
5.4 
Electronic devices, including mobile phones, tablets, iPods, and laptops, shall not be permitted in 
the examination room. 
          Note: Detailed guidelines for School Based Assessment are stipulated in the „Guidelines for School 
Based Assessment‟ developed by the Examinations Council of Zambia. 
6. 
Exemplar Test Items 
 
EoC 1: Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts. 
 
 
SECTION A: READING COMPREHENSION                   [30 MARKS] 
Item 1 
A. Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow. 
                      MA FAMILLE 
Je m‘appelle Chipo et j‘ai 14 ans. J‘ai une famille très sympathique. Nous sommes une famille de six personnes : mon 
père, ma mère, ma sœur, mes deux frères et moi. 
Mon père s‘appelle monsieur Kumwenda. Il est médecin et il travaille à l‘hôpital général de Monze. Il y va le matin à 7 
heures et rentre le soir à 18 heures. 
Il travaille du lundi au vendredi. Mais on l‘appelle aussi pendant certains samedis et dimanches quand il y a des cas 
d‘urgences comme les opérations. 
Ma mère s‘appelle Rite. Elle est comptable à la banque Stanbic. Elle se lève tôt le matin pour préparer le petit déjeuner 
pour tout le monde et après elle nous amène à l‘école par voiture. 
Ma sœur s‘appelle Sandrine, mes frères s‘appellent Paul et Martin. 
Paul a 20 ans et Martin a 18 ans. Ma sœur Sandrine a 16 ans. Paul est étudiant à l‘université Levy Mwanawasa. Il fait la 
pharmacologie. 
Ma sœur est élève à l‘école secondaire Monze. Elle est en troisième année secondaire. Elle apprend beaucoup de matières. 
Elle aime jouer au tennis avec ses amies et dessiner. 
Moi je suis en deuxième année, j‘étudie dans une école privée. 
Nous aimons passer du temps ensemble. Nous faisons des sorties le week-end. Nous allons au musée et au cinéma et nous 
jouons aussi aux jeux vidéo. Mon père nous aide à écrire les devoirs et ma mère nous raconte des histoires amusantes la 
nuit avant d‘aller dormir. 
J‘aime ma famille parce que tout le monde est gentil avec moi. Nous avons une maison confortable de quatre chambres à 
coucher, un salon de séjour, une salle à manger et une cuisine avec un jardin. 
TASKS                           
The tasks carter across various levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy from remembering to creating. 
1. 
Quelle est la profession du père de Chipo ?  
  
        (Retention-foundational)                                                                                                                         [1] 
2. 
Éxpliquez pourquoi le père travaille parfois le week-end.  
  
        (Inference- not simple recall)                                                                                                                   [2] 
3. 
Décrivez le rôle de la mère dans la famille. Donnez deux exemples. 
  
         (Analysing)                                                                                                                                               [2] 
4. Comparez l‘ȃge de Paul, Martin et Sandrine. Qui est l‘ainé ? 

--- PDF_PAGE 88 ---
- 72 - 
 
     (Analysing)                                                                                                                                                   [2] 
5. À votre avis, est-ce que la famille de Chipo est unie ? Justifiez votre réponse avec deux exemples du texte. 
     (Critical thinking)                                                                                                                                         [3] 
6. Imaginez que vous êtes Sandrine. Écrivez deux phrases pour décrire votre école et votre passe-temps préféré.  
     (Application + Creating)                                                                                                                              [3] 
7. Si vous étiez membre de cette famille, quelle activité préféreriez-vous faire le week-end ? Pourquoi ?  
    (Personalised communicative competence)                                                                                                  [2]  
 
Total Marks : 15 
 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
1. 
Il est médecin     
2. Il travaille parfois le week-end parce qu‘il y a des cas d‘urgence comme des opérations à l‘hôpital. 
3. La mère s‘occupe de la famille. Elle prépare le petit déjeuner et elle amène les enfants à l‘école/ Elle raconte des 
histoires la nuit/ Elle travaille aussi comme comptable. 
4. Paul a 20 ans, Martin a 18 ans et Sandrine a 16 ans. L‘ainé est Paul. 
5. Oui, la famille de Chipo est unie parce qu‘ils passent du temps ensemble le week-end et les parents aident les enfants 
avec leurs devoirs. 
     Ils font des sorties ensemble. 
     La mère raconte des histoires le soir. 
     Tout le monde est gentil avec Chipo. 
6. Je suis élève à l‘école secondaire de Monze et j‘apprends beaucoup de matières. 
    J‘aime jouer au tennis avec mes amies et dessiner pendants mon temps libre. 
7. Je préférerais aller au musée parce que j‘aime apprendre de nouvelles choses.  
 
 
 
EoC 1: Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts. 
 
 
B. Study the following information about a school and answer the questions that follow.   
Informations Générales 
• 
Nom                                : École Secondaire Kabwe 
• 
Adresse                           : BP 80430, Kabwe, Zambie. 
• 
Nombre d’élèves            : 800. 
• 
Nombre de professeurs : 50. 
Installations 
• 
Bâtiments                       : 5 
• 
Salles de classe              : 20 
• 
Laboratoires                 : 4 (physique, chimie, biologie, informatique). 
• 
Bibliothèques                : 2 
• 
Terrains de sport         :  3 (football, basket, tennis) 
Activités : 
• 
Sportives                       : football, basket, tennis, athlétisme. 
• 
Culturelles                    : musique, danse, théâtre. 

--- PDF_PAGE 89 ---
- 73 - 
 
• 
Clubs                             : anti-drogue, sciences, débat. 
 
Horaires 
• 
Heures de cours             : 7 h 30 - 13 h 30. 
• 
Heures de recréation     : 10 h 00 -10 h 30. 
• 
Jours d’activités             : lundi, activités culturelles/mercredi, activités de clubs/vendredi, activités sportives. 
 
Équipements 
• 
Ordinateurs                          :50 
• 
Projecteurs                           :6 
• 
Équipement de laboratoire : complet. 
 
TASKS  
1. Vous êtes un nouvel élève. Donnez deux informations importantes que vous devez connaître avant de vous inscrire dans 
cette école.                                                                                                                                      [2] 
2. Expliquez pourquoi cette école est bien organisée pour l‘apprentissage scientifique. Donnez deux raisons. [2] 
3. Si vous aimez lire et faire des recherches, quelles installations utiliserez-vous ? Pourquoi ?                         [2] 
4. Un élève aime la technologie et la communication digitale. Quels équipements peut-il utiliser ? Justifier votre réponse.      
[2] 
5. Comparez le nombre d‘élèves et de professeurs. Que pouvez-vous conclure ?                                              [2] 
6. Calculez la durée totale des cours par jour.                                                                                                     [2] 
7. Si vous aimez courir, quelle activité choisissez-vous et quel jour pouvez-vous la pratiquer ?                       [2] 
8. Proposez un nouveau club que l‘école pourrait ajouter et expliquer son importance.                                    [1] 
Total Marks : 15 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS 
1. 
Le nom de l‘école est École Secondaire Kabwe. 
         Il y a 800 élèves et 50 professeurs. 
2.  
 L‘école est bien organisée pour les sciences parce qu‘elle a quatre laboratoires (physique, chimie, biologie et 
informatique) et l‘équipement de laboratoire est complet.   
3. J‘utiliserai la bibliothèque parce qu‘il y a des livres pour lire et faire des recherches.  
4. Il peut utiliser les ordinateurs et les projecteurs parce qu‘ils sont utiles pour faire des recherches et des présentations.  
5. Il y a 800 élèves et 50 professeurs. Cela signifie qu‘il y a beaucoup plus d‘élèves que de professeurs. 
6. Les cours commencent à 7 h 30 et finissent à 13 h 30.  
    La durée totale est de 6 heures.  
7. Je choisis l‘athlétisme et je peux le pratiquer le vendredi pendant les activités sportives. 
8. L‘école pourrait ajouter un club d‘environnement pour protéger la nature et sensibiliser les élèves. 
 
Note: 
All tasks will require learners to think critically before responding. Various levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy, ranging from 
Remembering to Creating, will be applied.  
 
 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 90 ---
- 74 - 
 
 
EoC 1: Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts. 
 
 
C. LANGUAGE STRUCTURE AND TRANSLATION           [10 MARKS] 
(i) 
Language Structure       (5 Marks) 
Read each situation carefully and complete the sentence appropriately. 
1. 
Vous téléphonez à vos parents après six mois sans contact. Complétez la phrase correctement.         [1] 
Cela fait six mois que je ne ………………………… ai pas parlé. 
(les/leur/lui/i‘) 
Answer             : leur 
Cognitive Level: Application 
Why                  : Learner must apply knowledge of indirect object pronouns in authentic context. 
 
2. C‘est le jour de Noël. Complétez la phrase correctement.                                                                           [1] 
Avant d‟……………. à l‟église, nous prenons le petit déjeuner. 
(allons/aller/allez/allé) 
Answer              : aller 
Cognitive Level : Applying 
Why                   :  Requires understanding of infinitive after preposition « Avant de ». 
 
3. Les amies de Marie veulent connaître une information. Complétez la phrase.                                             [1] 
Elles veulent ………… où elle habite. 
(sait/savent/savoir/savons) 
Answer              : savoir 
Cognitive Level : Applying 
Why                   : Tests verb pattern after « vouloir ». 
 
4. Votre ami cherche quelque chose. Formulez correctement la question indirecte. 
Dis-moi, ………………. tu cherches.                                                                                                                  [1] 
(qu‟est-ce que /ce que/ que/ quoi) 
Answer               : ce que 
Cognitive Level : Analysing 
Why                    : Learner must distinguish between direct and indirect question structures.   
 
5. Vous êtes au restaurant et vous voulez commander poliment. Complétez. 
S‟il vous plaît, je ………… avoir un coca cola. 
(veux/voudrais/voudrai/voudrait)  
Answer    : voudrais 
Cognitive : Applying 
Why         : Tests pragmatic competence (conditional for politeness).     
                                                                                                         
(ii)  
Translation        (5 Marks) 
 You are addressing a new class as a teacher. Translate the following message into clear and appropriate French.  

--- PDF_PAGE 91 ---
- 75 - 
 
             1.          I am your teacher of French. I like discipline and order in my class.                                      [2] 
             2.  
It is very important to be quiet and to write your homework.                                               [2] 
3.  
Thank you very much.                                                                                                           [1] 
SUGGESTED ANSWERS  
           1. Je suis votre professeur de Français. J‘aime la discipline et l‘ordre dans ma classe.             
           2. C‘est très important de garder le silence et d‘écrire vos devoirs.                                           
           3. Merci beaucoup.       
                                                                                                                
 
EoC 2: Demonstrates mastery of written language conventions and transformations  
 
 
SECTION C 
 
WRITING                       [20 MARKS] 
Part 1. This task is compulsory 
Vous avez participé à une compétition de débat organisée par la banque ZANACO dans votre école. Vous avez remporté 
le premier prix de 50 000 Kwacha. 
Écrivez une lettre à votre professeur de français pour expliquer clairement et de manière réaliste comment vous allez 
utiliser cet argent. 
 (130 -150 mots). 
 
Part 2: This part contains two tasks. Candidates are required to choose and answer one. 
1. 
Votre ami(e) passe les vacances chez vous. Vous vous levez tôt le matin pendant qu‘il/elle dort encore et vous ne 
voulez pas le/la déranger. 
Écrivez un message pour lui/elle. Expliquez : 
• Où vous allez 
• Ce que vous allez faire 
• À quelle heure vous allez rentrer 
• Ce qu‘il/elle peut manger s‘il/ si elle a faim 
• Ce que vous allez faire le soir 
(130 -150 mots) 
 
2. 
Vous êtes ministre du tourisme en Zambie. Rédigez une publication sur Facebook pour inviter les touristes étrangers 
à visiter la Zambie. 
Dans votre texte, vous devez : 
• Inviter les touristes. 
• Décrire les principales attractions touristiques 
 Mentionner les activités économiques importantes 
 Parler des cérémonies traditionnelles 
 Présenter la nourriture zambienne 
 Expliquer les moyens de transport disponibles 
 Mentionner les langues locales 
(130 – 150 mots) 

--- PDF_PAGE 92 ---
- 76 - 
 
 
SCORING CRITERIA 
 
Criteria                                                            Marks          Descriptors 
1. 
Word limit                                                               1              Within range 
2. 
Task fulfilment & relevance                                    2             All required points addressed logically 
3. 
Organisation & Coherence                                      2            Clear structure, logic flow, paragraphing  
4. 
Language accuracy (Grammar & tense control       3            Correct use of structures 
5. 
Vocabulary range & appropriateness                       1            Appropriate and varied vocabulary 
6.          Spelling & Punctuation                                              1            Accurate spelling and punctuation 
Total Marks: 10 
Note: 
All composition tasks will be designed to promote critical and independent thinking. In alignment with Revised Bloom‘s 
Taxonomy, the questions will assess a range of cognitive skills, progressing from lower-order skills (Remembering and 
Understanding) to higher-order skills (Applying, Analysing, Evaluating, and Creating). This approach will ensure that 
the assessment measures not only linguistic competence but also learner‘s ability to organise, justify, and communicate 
ideas effectively.   
 

--- PDF_PAGE 93 ---
- 77 - 
 
Chapter 8: Chinese Language – 1125  
1 
Construct 
Demonstrates proficient use of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in real-life situations, 
adapting to audience and purpose to communicate effectively and support life-long learning. 
2 
Elements of Construct 
Assessment of candidates will be based on the following four (4) Elements of Construct (EoC):  
EoC1 
Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts 
 Reads and comprehends various types of continuous and non-continuous texts. 
 Interprets vocabulary and expressions accurately, considering context, audience and purpose. 
 Identifies and summarises main ideas and supporting details. 
 Translates texts accurately from the source language into the target language, preserving 
meaning, tone and intent.  
EoC2 
Demonstrates mastery of written language conventions and transformations 
 Spells words correctly with orthographic accuracy. 
 Applies grammatical and syntactic rules accurately in sentence construction. 
 Uses appropriate punctuation to enhance clarity and meaning. 
 Manipulates and transforms written language structures while maintaining grammatical 
accuracy and meaning. 
EoC3     Understands and interprets spoken information 
 Identifies main ideas and supporting details in spoken texts. 
 Analyses the speaker‘s purpose, tone and intended message. 
 Follows instructions, directions and questions accurately and responds appropriately.  
 Interprets spoken information from source language into the target language while 
maintaining meaning and intent.  
EoC 4 
Produces ideas, thoughts and opinions through spoken language 
 Organises ideas logically and coherently. 
 Speaks clearly, audibly and fluently. 
 Uses appropriate vocabulary, expressions and tone suited to purpose, context and audience.  
 Demonstrates accuracy in pronunciation and grammatical structures.  
3 
Test Design 
The Chinese Language Examination for School Certificate of Education Ordinary Level will consist of 
two components: Component 1, School Based Assessment (SBA), and Component 2, the Final 
Examination. The weighting of the School Based Assessment (SBA) and the Final Examination will be in 
the ratio of 40:60.  
The Test Design for the Chinese Language examination is summarised as follows: 
Test Design for Component 1 and 2 
Component Name 
Code 
Number of 
tasks 
Assessment Level 
Marks 
SBA Component 1 
1125/1 
5 
Form 2 
90 
5 
Form 3 
90 
1 Project 
Form 2-3 
20 
Final Examination 
Component 2 
1125/2 
8 
Form 4 
60 

--- PDF_PAGE 94 ---
- 78 - 
 
                    
3.1 
Structure 
3.1.1 
School Based Assessment (SBA) - Component 1 
School-Based Assessment (SBA) shall be conducted from Form 2 to Form 3 and shall 
constitute an integral component of the teaching and learning process.     
SBA tasks will be drawn from all the four (4) Elements of Construct and shall   include 
classwork, homework, assignments, oral presentations and projects.  
3.1.2 
Final Examination - Component 2 
The Final Examination will be based on Elements of Construct, namely, EoC 1: Reads, 
Interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts and EoC 2: 
Demonstrates mastery of written language conventions and transformations. The paper will 
comprise two sections A and B. 
3.1.3 
Section A: Reading Comprehension  
Reading Comprehension will comprise 2 items which will have 2 scenarios in form of 
passages. The passages will be non-continuous and continuous passages. Candidates will 
be expected to answer both.   
Passages used in the examination will be adapted to the candidates‘ level of competence as 
prescribed in the syllabus. Candidates will be required to read texts written in Chinese 
Language and respond to questions based on the given scenarios. Each continuous text will 
include semi-structured tasks, weighted at 20 marks. 
Non-continuous texts will be organised in a non-linear manner, with information presented 
in the form of timetables, maps, diagrams, picture series, and similar formats. The visual 
presentations will contain sufficient information to elicit responses and will include semi-
structured tasks, weighted at 20 marks. 
3.1.4 
Section B: Writing  
This section will comprise two parts: guided and unguided composition. In the guided 
composition part, candidates will attempt one compulsory item. In the unguided 
composition part, candidates shall be presented with two items and shall be required to 
choose one. 
Both the guided and unguided compositions will each carry a total of 10 marks. 
Writing tasks will be based on the following types of compositions:  
(i) Informal and formal letter writing 
(ii) Narrative writing 
(iii) Descriptive writing 
(iv) Argumentative writing 
(v) Curriculum vitae writing 
(vi) Profile writing 
3.2 
Test Content 
The SBA at Form 2 and 3 will assess all competences outlined in the syllabus at either form level. 
The Final Examination will include topics from the syllabus from Forms 1 to 4. 
3.2.1 
Types of Tasks and Items    

--- PDF_PAGE 95 ---
- 79 - 
 
            Items in both School Based Assessment (SBA) and the Final Examination shall comprise a 
combination of objective and subjective types. 
(i) The item types to be used in the School Based Assessment (SBA) shall include 
multiple-choice tasks, true or false items, matching items, short response questions, 
essay questions, and short answer questions, among others. 
(ii) The Final Examination shall comprise structured and semi-structured item types, 
including short response questions, completion of sentences, and essay items. 
3.2.2 
 Level of Difficulty 
             The level of questions in both the Final Examination and School Based Assessment (SBA) 
of the Chinese Language will be based on the Elements of Construct and will vary in 
complexity to ensure balanced coverage across lower-order, middle-order and higher-order 
cognitive domain of the revised Bloom‘s Taxonomy.  
              Assessment items shall be scenario-based and designed to require candidates to apply their 
knowledge, skills, values and attitudes to solve real-life communicative problems. 
              The level of difficulty of the Final Examination and SBA items shall be determined by the 
following factors: 
(i) The depth and breadth of the subject knowledge and language skills required to address 
the given scenario. 
(ii) The level of cognitive complexity involved in processing and responding to the task. 
(iii) The degree of abstract reasoning and critical thinking required.  
(iv) The number and complexity of cognitive processes necessary to generate appropriate 
and meaningful response.  
3.2.3 
Syllabus Coverage 
The Final Examination and School-Based Assessment (SBA) shall be based on the Chinese 
Language Syllabus (CDC,2024) for Forms 1 to 4. The assessment shall focus on the 
development and evaluation of key competences, such as communication, analytical 
thinking, citizenship, collaboration, problem-solving and critical thinking.  
Assessment tasks shall be designed to integrate these competences within authentic 
language contexts to promote meaningful learning and practical application. To ensure 
validity, reliability, consistency and comparability across examination cycles, the Test 
Specification, Test Framework and School Based Assessment (SBA) Framework shall be 
applied. These tools shall guide and standardise development and moderation of test items 
and SBA tasks. 
The following table indicates how the syllabus has been summarised per Element of 
Construct, per Assessment Component and the Cognitive Level of the revised Bloom‘s 
Taxonomy. 
    

--- PDF_PAGE 96 ---
- 80 - 
 
Syllabus Coverage and Levels of Demand 
Elements of 
Construct 
COMPONENT 1 
COMPONENT 2 
Syllabus  
Coverage 
Cognitive Level 
EoC 1 
 
Reading 
Comprehension  
 
Reading 
Comprehension  
 
Reading and 
understanding 
different types of 
texts, 
comprehending the 
language structures 
within them, 
applying these 
structures 
appropriately, and 
accurately 
translating Chinese 
texts into English. 
Remembering, 
understanding, 
applying, 
analysing, 
evaluating and 
creating. 
EoC 2 
Writing 
Writing 
Producing coherent, 
purposeful and 
grammatically 
accurate written 
compositions with 
Chinese characters 
written correctly. 
Remembering, 
understanding, 
applying, 
analysing, 
evaluating and 
creating. 
 
EoC 3 
 
Listening 
 
Listening to 
different types of 
audio text, 
comprehending key 
information and 
responding 
accurately to 
questions. 
Remembering, 
understanding, 
applying, 
analysing, 
evaluating and 
creating. 
 
EoC 4 
 
Speaking 
 
 
Presenting ideas 
orally, engaging in 
conversations, and 
responding 
appropriately in 
different 
communicative 
situations. 
Remembering, 
understanding, 
applying, 
analysing, 
evaluating and 
creating. 
 
4. 
Scoring Criteria 
4.1  
School Based Assessment – Component 1 Scoring Criteria 
SBA tasks will be prepared and scored by the subject teacher at the school. To ensure tasks are 
pitched at the appropriate level of difficulty, teachers will use the SBA Framework.  
Teachers will use the Scoring Guides for each SBA task to ensure consistency, fairness, and 
accuracy when evaluating learners‘ performance on class tests, projects, practical work, 
presentations, assignments, and other structured activities. 

--- PDF_PAGE 97 ---
- 81 - 
 
 
 
4.2 
Final Examination – Component 2 
Before scoring of the Final Examination commences, a co-ordination meeting will be held to 
harmonise the Scoring Guide for that particular year. Furthermore, during marking, continuous 
checking of scoring will be done to ensure that examiners maintain the standard of scoring by 
conforming to the Scoring Guide.  
5. 
Notes and Guidelines 
5.1 
Candidates will be expected to sit for both Component 1 and Component 2 in order to be graded 
in the subject. If a candidate absconds from one of the Components, no partial marks shall be 
awarded. 
5.2 
Standard Chinese shall be used in answering examination questions.  
5.3 
Dictionaries, textbooks and any other reference books will not be allowed in the examination room. 
5.4 
Electronic devices such as mobile phones, tablets, iPods and laptops will not be allowed in the 
examination room. 
Note: Detailed guidelines for School-Based Assessment are stipulated in the „Guidelines for School Based 
Assessment‟ developed by the Examinations Council of Zambia. 
6. 
Exemplar Test Items 
EoC 1: Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts. 
SECTION A         READING COMPREHENSION 
PART 1                                 (5 Marks) 
Read the following passage and answer the follow up questions. 
马丁今年十五岁，是一个赞比亚学生。他家有五口人：爸爸、妈妈、哥哥、妹妹和他。马丁的爸
爸是司机，妈妈是医生。哥哥上大学，妹妹还在读小学。 
今天是星期二。早上六点半，马丁起床。他先喝了一杯牛奶，然后吃了一个面包。七点，他跟妹
妹一起走路去学校，因为他们的家离学校不太远。 
到了学校，马丁先去教室放书包，然后去礼堂参加早会。第一节课是数学课，第二节是汉语课。
马丁很喜欢汉语，因为汉语老师又亲切又有趣。他会说一点儿汉语，可是他说得还不太好。 
中午，天气很热，太阳很大。马丁和朋友们坐在树下吃午饭。他吃米饭和鸡肉，还喝了一瓶水。
吃完饭，他们去操场踢足球。马丁踢得很好，他的朋友们都说：“马丁，你比我们快多了！” 
放学后，马丁想去市场买水果。市场在学校的东边。他走出校门，一直往前走，再往右拐，就到
了市场。他买了两个芒果和一公斤苹果。 
回到家后，马丁做作业。他写汉字、读课文，还练习说汉语。晚上七点，他和家人一起吃晚饭。

--- PDF_PAGE 98 ---
- 82 - 
 
吃完饭，他给中国朋友发了一条微信消息：“你好！今天我学习了新的汉字！” 
睡觉前，他看了十分钟的书。十点，马丁关灯睡觉。他觉得今天虽然很忙，但非常开心。 
TASK 1— Short answer questions  
Answer the following questions based on the passage     
1. 
马丁家有几口人？请写出他们分别是谁？他们是谁？    (Remembering)                [1] 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
答案：马丁家有五口人：爸爸、妈妈、哥哥、妹妹和马丁。 
2. 
马丁和妹妹怎么去学校？为什么？？   (Understanding)                                               [1] 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
答案：他们走路去学校，因为他们的家离学校不太远。 
 
3. 
用―因为……所以……‖写一句话，说明马丁为什么喜欢汉语课。(Applying)             [1] 
………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
  答案：他们走路去学校，因为他们的家离学校不太远。 
4. 
马丁哪两个时间很忙？写出来。(Remembering)                                                              [1] 
……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
答案：早上和放学以后。 
5. 
如果你是马丁，你晚上会做什么？写三件事。。 (Evaluating)                                    [1] 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
答案：如果我是马丁，晚上我会做作业、看书、给朋友发消息。 
 
EoC 1: Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts. 
 
TASK 2 — Sentence Structure           (5 Marks) 
Use the passage about Martin’s day as a guide and rewrite the sentences below using the grammar structure 
provided in each question.  
1. 
Rewrite the sentence using 因为„„所以„„  (Applying)                            [1]                       
马丁喜欢汉语课。他觉得老师很有趣。 

--- PDF_PAGE 99 ---
- 83 - 
 
 
„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„ 
 
    答案：因为老师很有趣，所以马丁喜欢汉语课。 
  2.  
Rewrite the sentence using 往„„走    (Applying)                                     [1]                          
       去市场要右转，再一直走。 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
     答案：马丁跑得比他的朋友快。 
   3. Rewrite the sentence using 比    (Applying)                                                  [1]                             
            马丁跑得快。他的朋友跑得慢。 
……………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
答案：马丁跑得比他的朋友快。 
    4.  Rewrite the sentence using 在„„下  (Applying)                                        [1]                           
马丁的书包放在桌子。 
 
„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„ 
 
        答案：马丁的书包在桌子下。 
      5.  Rewrite the sentence using 会 / 不会  (Applying)                                       [1]                          
马丁说汉语。 
 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
     答案：马丁会说一点儿汉语。 
 
EoC 1 Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts. 
TASK 3 — Sentence Re-ordering                        ( 5 Marks) 
Give a small narration of what Martin’s day (马丁) is like by re-ordering the following sentences by putting them in 
the correct order to form a short, logical story.       (Applying) 
a) 放学以后，马丁去了市场买水果                                               [1] 
b) 早上六点半，马丁起床，然后吃早饭。                                         [1] 
c) 晚上，他做作业，也给朋友发了一条消息。                                     [1] 
d) 中午的时候，天气很热，他和朋友们一起吃午饭。                               [1] 
e) 他七点走路去学校。                                                         [1] 
1. 
……………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

--- PDF_PAGE 100 ---
- 84 - 
 
 
2. 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
3. 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
4. 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
5. 
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
答案 
(b) 早上六点半，马丁起床，然后吃早饭。 
(e) 他七点走路去学校。 
(d) 中午的时候，天气很热，他和朋友们一起吃午饭。 
(a) 放学以后，马丁去了市场买水果。 
(c) 晚上，他做作业，也给朋友发了一条消息。 
 
EoC 1 Reads, interprets, summarises and translates continuous and non-continuous texts. 
PART 2                             (5 Marks) 
Chipo is a Zambian student who has just moved to Beijing. Every morning, he needs to travel from his new home to 
school, but he is not sure which transport method is the best for him. To help him decide, his teacher gives him a 
transport comparison table showing how long each mode of transportation takes and how much it costs. Chipo uses 
this table to understand his options and choose the most suitable way to get to school. Answer the following 
questions based on the transport comparison table. 
Transport Comparison Table  
   
交通方式  
Transport mode 
所需时间 （分钟） 
Time  
价格 
Price 
公共汽车 
25 分钟 
10 元 
出租车 
10 分钟 
40 元 
自行车 
15 分钟 
0-5 元 
走路 
30 分钟 
免费 
   
TASK 1— Short answer questions                
    Answer the following questions based on the text.  
1. 哪一种交通方式最便宜？ (Analysing)                               [1]             
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
答案：走路最便宜，因为是免费的。 
