
--- PDF_PAGE 248 ---
- 232 - 
 
Chapter 22: Hospitality Management – 6015  
1. 
Construct 
Exhibits knowledge, skills, and attitudes required to manage and execute events in the hospitality industry. 
2. 
Elements of Construct  
The Hospitality Management examination will be based on four (4) Elements of Construct (EoC). 
The following are the Elements of Construct together with the summaries of what they will assess: 
EoC1 
Understands the history of hospitality            
• 
Demonstrates knowledge and understanding of the historical background of the hospitality 
industry. 
 
EoC2 
Delivers quality guest experience and coordinates effectively with other departments in 
hospitality facilities. 
• 
Manages front office operations and services. 
 
Applies cleanliness, hygiene and safety measures in housekeeping. 
EoC3 
Demonstrates skills in food technology and preparation 
• 
Applies food safety protocols and procedures in food production 
 
Creates menus and caters for different functions according to the type and need. 
EoC4 
Applies entrepreneurial skills in hospitality business 
• 
Demonstrates entrepreneurial skills in hospitality industry. 
 
Demonstrates knowledge on entrepreneurial skills cosmetology. 
3. 
Test Design 
The design of Hospitality Management examination will consist of two components.  
Component 1 will be School Based Assessment (SBA) which will be set and scored in schools by subject 
teachers. It will be administered in Form 2 and 3.  
Component 2 will be the Final Examination administered at the end of Form 4. It will be set and marked 
centrally by the Examinations Council of Zambia (ECZ) at the end of Form 4.  
The SBA will be weighted 30% while the Final Examination will be weighted 70% by ECZ. 
Summary of the Test Design for Hospitality Management – Component 1 and 2  
Component 
Name 
Code 
Number of 
Test Items/ 
Tasks 
Level 
Duration 
Total 
Marks 
School Based 
Assessment 
Component 1  
6015/1 
7 
Form 2 
1 Year 
100 
7 
 
Form 3 
1 Year 
100 
 
200 
Final 
Examination 
Component 2 
6015/2 
 
5 
 
 
Form 4 
2 hours 
80 
The Test Design will consider Structure and Test Content of the assessment for Hospitality Management. 

--- PDF_PAGE 249 ---
- 233 - 
 
3.1 
Structure 
3.1.1 School Based Assessment - Component 1  
SBA tasks will assess learners based on all the four EoC.  
The component will have a total of fourteen (14) tasks; seven (7) at Form 2 and seven (7) at 
Form 3 which will have a total of 200 marks at the end of Secondary Education Ordinary 
Level.  
The structure of the SBA tasks will be determined by the subject teacher and the type of tasks 
with regard to learners‘ abilities and challenges. 
3.1.2 Final Examination - Component 2  
The Final Examination will assess learners on all the four EoC. The component will have 
two sections, A and B.  
Section A (20 marks) will have two test items which will come from one EoC and 
candidates will have to choose one item only. Each item will carry 20 marks.  
Section B (60 marks) will have three items derived from the remaining three EoC and they 
will all be compulsory.  Each item will carry 20 marks.  
A candidate will be required to respond to a total of four (4) out of five test items at a total of 
80 marks. 
3.2 
Test Content 
The test content for both component 1 and 2 will consider Test Item Types, Level of Difficulty and 
Syllabus Coverage. 
3.2.1 
Types of Tasks and Items 
School Based Assessment - Component 1: Will be administered through both formative 
and summative. It will consist of structured, semi structured and unstructured tasks which 
will be presented in form of written, practical and projects. The tasks will be drawn from 
all the four EoC. (For details, refer to the School Based Assessment Guidelines for 
Examination for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level produced by the ECZ).   
Final Examination - Component 2: will be summative assessment and it will consist of 
structured, semi structured or unstructured test items.  
Section A: will have two items derived from one EoC. It will assess candidates‘ ability and 
skills to analyse a scenario and create a business plan, market analysis, events menus, 
budget or advertisement posters.  The section will assess candidates‘ level of knowledge to 
interpret given information and ability to create or innovate something.   
Section B: will require candidates to give brief explanations according to the interpretation 
of the task. Each test item will cover related topics and competences as clustered in the 
EoC. The test items will be structured, semi structured or unstructured depending on the 
scenario and competences to be assessed.  
Each test item will cover related topics and competences as clustered in the EoC and will 
render some test items to have a scaffolding approach of questioning.  
3.2.2 
Syllabus Coverage 
The examination will cover the entire Hospitality Management Syllabus for Secondary 
Education Ordinary Level, Form 1-4 produced by Curriculum Development Centre (CDC 
2024 edition). 
The development of SBA tasks and Final Examination test items will be aligned to the key 
competences such as analytical thinking, citizenship, collaboration creativity and 

--- PDF_PAGE 250 ---
- 234 - 
 
innovation, critical thinking, communication, digital literacy, problem solving, 
entrepreneurship, financial literacy, environmental sustainability and emotional intelligence 
as guided in the Syllabus.  
The test items and tasks will also be linked to clusters of related topics and competences 
which have been grouped into EoC. The specific competences are reflected in the SBA Test 
Framework, Test Framework and Test Specification table produced by the ECZ. These 
assessment tools will ensure validity, reliability and comparability of the assessments from 
year to year.   
            Distribution of marks across Elements of Construct 1 to 4 for Component 2 
EoC1 
EoC2 
EoC3 
EoC4 
Total Marks 
20 
20 
20 
20 
80 
3.2.3    Level of Difficulty 
Both Components 1 and 2 will assess learners‘ acquisition of knowledge and competences 
across all the six levels of the revised Bloom‘s taxonomy.  The level of difficulty will be 
spread according to the way the topics and competences are clustered in each EoC.  
The application of skills will be assessed mainly through applying, analysing, evaluating and 
creating. Real life problems will be presented in different scenarios based on EoC as test 
items. Tasks will then follow to unpack the scenario and allow the candidate to interpret the 
scenario and give a response that will solve the problems.  
The acquisition of knowledge will be assessed through remembering and understanding of 
concepts and applying them to real life scenarios from EoC in order to respond to the 
problems.   
Both component 1 and 2 will be Competence Based Assessments (CBA) which will present 
real life scenarios. Candidates will need to apply critical thinking creativity and problem-
solving skills in order to come up with expected responses. 
The levels of difficulty for test items and tasks will be determined by the following factors: 
(i) The complexity of the scenario or real-life situation on a given Element of Construct that 
a candidate will be expected to respond to.    
(ii) The subject knowledge and skills required to respond to the real-life problems and 
challenges (level of competence). 
(iii) The complexity and number of cognitive processes required to generate responses to test 
items and tasks. 
(iv) The level of abstract critical thinking involved to arrive at a response. 
 
(v) The extent to which a candidate will have to strategise in order to respond to the items 
and tasks. 
Distribution of marks across the revised levels of Bloom‟s Taxonomy: Component 2 
Cognitive Level 
Remembering Understanding Applying Analysing Evaluating Creating Marks 
Marks Distribution 
08 
30 
15 
13 
04 
10 
80 
4. 
Scoring Criteria 
School Based Assessment - Component 1: will be scored by teachers in their respective schools as 
guided by scoring guides and rubrics found in the School Based Assessment Guidelines for Examination 
for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level for Practical Subjects produced by the ECZ. 

--- PDF_PAGE 251 ---
- 235 - 
 
Final Examination - Component 2: will be marked centrally by the ECZ using marking schemes 
provided by the ECZ. (Refer to Chapter 30 on Grading and Certification). 
NB: To achieve an overall mark for Hospitality Management, a candidate must sit both components. No 
overall grade will be awarded to a candidate who absents from any of the components. 
5. 
Notes for SBA - Component 1  
SN 
Notes and Guidelines 
Component 
5.1 
Candidates should demonstrate the application of knowledge and understanding of concepts 
and theories through critical thinking in order to generate required responses to problems 
rather than just memorising facts.  
1 and 2 
5.2 
All the four (4) EoC should be assessed and each candidate should have a feel of each EoC. 
1 and 2 
5.3 
Candidates will be required to respond to a total of four (4) out of five test items at a total of 
80 marks. 
2 
5.4 
Teachers should administer formative assessment tasks along side teaching as part of 
teaching and learning process. 
1 
5.5 
Teachers should administer a total of 14 SBA tasks; 7 at Form 2 and 7 at Form 3 and submit 
all scores to ECZ. 
1 
5.6 
Projects in form of presentations, research work or artifacts should be strictly supervised and 
scored at each stage as opposed to receiving completely finished projects.  
1 
5.7 
Teachers should utilise group work tasks during practicing and perfecting learners‘ skills but 
for tasks that are meant to be submitted to ECZ, individual tasks are preferred where 
applicable. 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 252 ---
- 236 - 
 
6. 
Exemplar Test Items  
Example 1 
EoC2: Delivers quality guest experience and coordinates effectively with other departments in hospitality 
facilities 
Item 1 (20marks) 
Passions Resort has been hit with a shortage of staff during a peak tourist season. Employees are overwhelmed and 
some have even called in sick. The guests complain about slow service and long wait times. 
Task 1: As a supervisor, make a presentation you will use to discuss with management on how best the resort should 
handle the situation                                                                                                     (10marks)   
Expected Response 
Use scoring Rubric (SBA Guidelines) guest-centric approach; proactive care; technology integration; empowering 
staff; simplifying check-ins procedures; solicit and respond to feedback from clients; focus on the feel.  
Level of difficulty: Creating 
Specific Competence: Demonstrates understanding of management.  
Task 2: Discuss benefits that Passions Resort will gain by using good management. (10 Marks) 
Expected response 
Drive profitability; elevate guest satisfaction; boost staff morale; increase revenue; highten repeat business; betters 
conflict resolution; foster positive production; consistent high-quality service. 
Level of difficulty: Understanding 
Specific competence: Demonstrates understanding of management. 
 Example 2 
EoC2: Delivers quality guest experience and coordinates effectively with other departments in hospitality 
facilities. 
Item 1 (20marks) 
You have been hired to plan a wedding event that will take place at a luxurious lodge. The couple has invited 150 
guests and ten of their family members will lodge at the facility for three nights. The couple will also spend two nights 
at the facility before proceeding for their honey moon. 
 
Task 1: Explain five elements that will help you to make this wedding event a success.  (10marks)   
Expected Response 
Venue setup, catering, décor, entertainment, guest accommodation, logistics and contingency; communication;  
Level of difficulty: Understanding; analysing 
Specific Competence:  2.4.2.1 Cater for different functions 
Task 2: Identify three departments and explain how each will render a service towards the success of the wedding 
event.                                                                                                                            (3marks) 
Expected Response 
Front office: guest check -in; Housekeeping: room readiness; Food and beverage: catering; Maintenance: power water 
facilities; Security;  
Level of difficulty: Understanding 
Specific Competence:   1.1.4.1 Analyse the departments of a hospitality industry 
Task 3: Suggest two methods and explain why the lodge management should utilise such to evaluate their performance 
after the event.                                                                                                   (2marks) 
Expected Response 
Guest feedback surveys; Financial analysis (profit vs cost); Post-event staff debriefs; Attendee check-in data; 
Level of difficulty: analysing 
Specific Competence: 4.5.2.1 Organise banquets 

--- PDF_PAGE 253 ---
- 237 - 
 
Task 4: Prepare a quotation for 150 quests invited to the wedding.                                    (5marks) 
Expected Response: 
Venue hire for one day; Catering for 150 guests; Décor; entertainment; PA system; Accommodation for ten guests by 
three nights; accommodation for a couple by two nights; Total cost with contingency. 
Level of difficulty: Creating 
Specific Competence: 2.4.2.1 cater for different functions 
 
