
--- PDF_PAGE 260 ---
- 244 - 
 
Chapter 24: Physical Education and Sport – 9010  
1. 
Construct 
Applies Perceptual motor movement, problem solving, Interpersonal and intrapersonal skills to enhance 
Physical Fitness, mental wellbeing and lifelong health habits in creativity and Entrepreneurship. 
2. 
Elements of Construct (EoC) 
Physical Education examination will be based on 5 elements of construct and they will be as follows: 
EoC 1 
Understands health related activities in physical education 
• Assesses health related activities in Physical Education and Sports nutrition. 
EoC 2 
Demonstrates motor activities in sports 
• Assesses movements, perceptual learning, and fitness activities. 
EoC 3 
Understands human body and its movements 
• Ability to understand body systems, types of forces and Biomechanics in relation to sports; 
EoC 4 
Applies entreprenuerial skills 
• Applies knowledge and understanding in entrepreneurship skills and legal ethical issues in 
relation to sports 
EoC 5 
Applies athletics skills management of sports events and facilities 
• Applies knowledge and understanding in sports Management, organization and sports in 
skills development 
3 
Test Design 
Physical Education and Sport examination will comprise two components. Component 1 will be School 
Based Assessment (SBA) which will be set and scored by respective teachers at school level in Form 2 
and 3. Component 2 will be the Final Examination which will be set and marked centrally by the 
Examinations Council of Zambia at the end of Form 4. The weighting for SBA and Final Examination will 
be 40% and 60% respectively.  
 
Component 
Name 
Code 
Number of 
Test Items/ 
Tasks 
Level 
Duration 
Total 
Marks 
School Based 
Assessment 
Component 1  
9010/1 
7 
Form 2 
1 Year 
100 
7 
Form 3 
1 Year 
100 
Final 
Examination 
Component 2 
9010/2 
 
5 
Form 4 
2h 30mins 
100 
3.1 
Structure 
The structure for SBA- Component 1 will be determined by the type of tasks and by the teacher.  
SBA will assess various tasks based on the Elements of Construct as prescribed above in 2.0 The 
teacher will assess from all the five (5) elements of construct. 
Final Examination- Component 2 examination will consist of 2 sections which will consists of 4 
items in section A and 1 item in section B. This component will have 5 tasks. Learners will answer 
all the items in section A, whilst in section B there will be 3 items and learners will be required to 

--- PDF_PAGE 261 ---
- 245 - 
 
choose 1. The component will comprise of 100 marks, weighting 60%. Candidates will be expected 
to write their answers clearly in the answer spaces provided.  
3.2 
Test Content 
SBA - Component 1 will consist of objective and subjective tasks, which will include theoretical 
and hands-on skills such as Physical and Sporting activities. Projects will also be assessed in 
particular components which will be decided by the class teacher.  
3.2.1 
Test item Types 
Final Examination- Component 2 will consist of item such as situation analysis, problem-
solving, interpretation of diagrams, matching, and grouping. Semi-structures and subjective 
types of items will be used to assess learners. 
NOTE: Submission of SBA marks will be done annually to ECZ at each grade level.  
3.2.2 
Syllabus Coverage 
School Based Assessment and Final Examination will be based on the Physical Education 
and Sport syllabus for Form 1 to 4 produced by the Curriculum Development Centre, 2024.  
School Based Assessment and Final Examination will also be based on the key competences 
such as analytical thinking, citizenship, collaboration creativity and innovation, critical 
thinking, communication, digital literacy, problem solving, entrepreneurship, financial 
literacy, environmental sustainability and emotional intelligence. The tasks and test items 
will be based on related competences grouped together into Elements of Construct.   
Specific competences are reflected in the SBA Test Framework and Test Specification 
produced and prepared by the Examinations Council of Zambia. These assessment tools will 
ensure, validity, reliability and comparability and standardization of the assessments from 
year to year.   
3.2.3 
Level of difficulty 
The level of difficulty of questions in both SBA tasks and Final Examination will range 
from remembering to creating. Conceptual knowledge will be determined by the following 
factors: 
(i) 
Complexity of Scenario: The real-life situation on a given Element of Construct that a 
candidate will be expected to respond to correctly. 
(ii) 
The subject knowledge and skills required to the real-life problems and challenges 
correctly. 
(iii) 
The Cognitive Level- The complexity and number of cognitive processes required to  
generate responses to test items and tasks. 
(iv) 
The level of abstract and critical thinking involved. 
(v) 
The extent to which a candidate will have to strategize in order to respond to the 
items or tasks. 
The Final Examination will assess skills across the six levels of the revised Bloom‘s 
    Taxonomy.  
Distribution of marks across the Bloom‟s levels of difficulty for Component 
Remembering 
Understanding 
Applying 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Creating 
Total 
5 
6 
10 
6 
1 
2 
30 
4 
Scoring Criteria 
4.1 
School Based Assessment 

--- PDF_PAGE 262 ---
- 246 - 
 
This component will be internally assessed and moderated throughout the course under the 
supervision of the subject teacher at school level. 
 
 
4.2 
Final Examination 
It will be externally set and centrally marked. 
4.2.1 
All candidate scripts will be collected and marked centrally by appointed examiners. 
4.2.2 
A detailed official scoring criteria will be provided by the Examinations Council of Zambia 
to ensure consistency and fairness. 
4.2.3 
The scoring criteria will include acceptable alternative answers and will be thoroughly 
discussed and agreed upon during the examiners‘ coordination meeting. 
5. 
Notes and Guidance 
Final Examination – Component 1 
5.1 
In order to achieve an overall mark in Physical Education, a candidate must have marks for both the 
SBA and the summative paper. If a candidate absents himself or herself from one of the 
assessments, no overall grade will be awarded. 
5.2 
The examiner should ensure that all the necessary equipment for the practical examination and 
facilities are readily available for the candidate. 
5.3 
The equipment for candidates‘ practices and preparation is given to them a month before the 
practical examination is conducted. 
5.4 
The examiner should assist the candidate on the choice of questions to choose in respect of the 
availability of the equipment and facilities. 
School Based Assessment – Component 2 
5.5 
School Based Assessment (SBA) component 1 will have two (2) parts. This will be Summative and 
Formative respectively. 
5.6 
The SBA One (1) tasks/activities should be supported by the availability of all the necessary 
teaching and learning materials, equipment and facilities in the school.  
5.7 
Where such facilities are lacking, the school may organise for a community facility where the 
practical tasks/activities can be assessed.  
5.8 
The SBA two (2) will be conducted continuously as the teacher is teaching. The learner will 
perform one (1) compulsory task and choose any two (2) from the options given. 
5.9 
The appointed teacher will be required to enter raw marks on the Examinations Council of Zambia 
portal, after which a print out of the candidate Marks Sheets will be made. 
6. 
Exemplar Test Items 
EoC 1: Understands Health Related activities in Physical Education 
Item  
Response 
A School hosted an inter-schools cross country race covering a 
distance of 800km. Before the race the nutritionist advised the 
runner to eat carbohydrates rich meals, stay hydrated and take a 
light snack two hours before the event. 
However, during the race, it was observed that many runners 
became dizzy and weak, while some even collapsed and sustained 
bruises on their knees and twisted ankles. 
RICE 
- R -rest 
-  I - Ice 
- C- Compression 
- E - Elevation 
- Pre-Race Hydration stations 
- Medical screening before events 
- Adequate warm up and stretching sessions 
- setting up water points along the route. 

--- PDF_PAGE 263 ---
- 247 - 
 
Tasks 
1. Give 4 first-aid measures for runners who collapsed during the 
race. [4 marks] 
2. Explain 5 factors that the event organisers might have done to 
prevent similar incident. [5 marks] 
3. Discuss how weather conditions might have contributed to the 
runner‘s symptoms. [5 marks] 
4. What factors, besides poor nutrition or hydration, could cause 
athletes to feel dizzy or collapse during a race. [5 marks] 
- Monitoring whether conditions and adjusting 
the race time. 
 
- High temperatures 
- Strong sunlight 
- Humid weather 
- Wait or muddy condition 
- Cold weather 
 
-  Low blood sugar 
-  Fatigue 
- Lack of training 
- Lack of rest 
Competence: Demonstrates knowledge on the health-related activities 
Level of Difficulty: Knowledge, understand, analyze, Apply 
Key Competences: Analytical Thinking, Critical Thinking and Problem solving. 
EoC 1: Demonstrates Motor activities in sports 
Item  
Response 
During the annual ―Health Body‖ Healthy Mind‖ school sports 
program, learners were grouped to participate in three major 
activities: Fitness training, basic gymnastic and light combative 
activities. 
However midway through the program, several challenges imaged. 
Some learners became exhausted too quickly during the fitness 
training. Others struggled with balance during gymnastic and a few 
learners performed combative moves too aggressively, causing 
unsafe interactions. 
 Tasks 
1. Explain 4 ways the teacher would have helped the learners who 
became tired too quickly during the fitness circuit. [4] 
2. State 4 basic safety rules that learners were to follow during 
combative activities. [4] 
3. Discuss 4 measures to assist learners who were afraid to perform 
a forward roll in gymnastics. [4] 
 
- Provide rest breaks 
- intensifying activities for fitness 
- teach proper exercise technique. 
- encourage gradual training and fitness 
progression 
 
- Use correct technique 
- Respect your partners limits 
- wear appropriate protective gear 
- Follow the teacher‘s instructions at all times. 
 
 
- Provide step by step demonstration 
- Use supportive equipment and safety mats 
- Offer physical and verbal guidance. 
- Build confidence in a learner. 
Competence: Demonstrates knowledge on the motor activities in sports 
Level of Difficulty: Understand, analyze, Apply 
Key Competences: Analytical Thinking, Critical Thinking and Problem solving. 
EoC 3: Understands human body and its movements 
Item 
Response 
A sprinter from Mume athletic club is preparing for a 
400m competition. During training on the curve phase 
of the track, her coach notices that although she leans 
inward correctly, her strides length becomes shorter. 
After the session, she experiences tightness in her 
hamstrings and mild discomfort in her right knee. Since 
the hamstring are responsible for the hip extension and 
knee 
flexion, 
the 
shortened 
strides 
and 
poor 
biomechanics place extra stress on these muscles, 
increasing the risk of injury and reducing running 
efficiency. 
1. State 3 reasons why running on a curve caused 
her strides lengthen to become shorter. 
-leaned inwards on the curve 
- her hamstrings became tight during the curve phase 
- she felt mild discomfort in her right leg. 
-Prevents ham strides from moving through a full range 
motion. 
- Poor biomechanics can shift extra load onto one leg, 
increasing stress on the right knee during curve running. 
-More power strides 

--- PDF_PAGE 264 ---
- 248 - 
 
2. How could shorten strides length contributes to 
tightness in her hamstrings? 
3. Describe what might be the relationship 
between her right knee discomfort and her 
change in biomechanics on the curve. 
4. Describe 4 ways how the improving of hip 
extension 
help 
this 
athlete 
runs 
more 
efficiently. 
5. Explain why the coach‘s concern about the 
athlete shortened strides. 
- improving speed and acceleration 
-reducing muscle strain. 
-longer and more powerful strides 
-reduced speed in performance 
- possible technical errors 
- Risk of injuries. 
 
 
Competence: Demonstrates knowledge on the Human body and its movements 
Level of Difficulty: Understand, analyze, Apply 
Key Competences: Analytical Thinking, Critical Thinking and Problem solving. 
EoC 4: Applies entrepreneurial skills 
Item  
Response 
During an ABSA cup match scheduled for 15hrs 
between Nkana Football club and Zesco united at Levy 
Mwanawasa stadium, spectators began arriving as early 
as 07:00hrs. Because they had waited for many hours 
without eating, several fans started feeling dizzy and 
sleepy by the afternoons. 
1. What business could an entrepreneur identify from 
spectators feeling dizzy and sleepy?                   
(Understand) 
2. How could entrepreneur use timing to their advantage 
at such an event? 
3. What type of product would be most suitable for 
selling at a long waiting event like this? 
4. What marketing strategy could help a vender suicide 
at this event? 
5. Why is understanding customer‘s behaviour for 
entrepreneurs in this scenario? 
 
-start a food and beverage service to provide early 
morning snack and drinks. 
-By opening their stall early in the morning so that they 
can save funds long before the much begins. 
- Positioning business in strategic sport. 
-Light portable snacks 
- Quick energy drinks. 
- Water 
-using visible branding 
-loud but friendly announcement 
- mobile selling around the stadium to reach hungr 
spectators easily. 
-Know that funds come very early helps entrepreneur plan 
stock pricing. 
- Service to maximize sales and customer satisfaction. 
Competence: Demonstrates knowledge on the entrepreneurial skills 
Level of Difficulty: Understand, analyze, Apply 
Key Competences: Analytical Thinking, Critical Thinking and Problem solving. 
EoC 5: Applies athletic skills, Management of sports events and facilities. 
Item  
Response 
Sunrise secondary school planned an inter-school sports day 
featuring athletics, football, volleyball and swimming. 
During inspection the physical education department 
discovered damaged sports facilities and inadequate 
equipment, such as torn nets, and unstable posts. On the 
event day, the swimming session faced safety issues because 
the lifeguards arrived late and some learners lacked 
confidence in the water. Poor organization led to delays 
missing equipment, and confusion among teams due limited 
-lack of confidence 
- limited swimming experience 
- poor preparations before swimming starts 
 
-regular inspection of equipment 
- repair sports facilities on time 
- update equipment inventory 

--- PDF_PAGE 265 ---
- 249 - 
 
officials. A visiting sports coordinator reminded the school 
to follow international sports standards to ensure safety, 
fairness, and proper management of the event. 
1. Explain 3 factors that led some swimmers to be 
uncomfortable during swimming.                                               
(3 marks) 
2. Identify 4 measures that the school should have put in 
place to improve equipment management event.                
3. Discuss 4 positive impacts that the visiting sports 
coordinator advice can create to participants and school 
management. 
- replace damaged equipment. 
 
-Proper event management 
- Involve qualified personnel 
- International sports standards promotes safety of the 
players. 
- International sports standards promotes fairness in all 
angles of sports. 
Competence: Demonstrates knowledge on the athletic skills 
Level of Difficulty: Knowledge, Understand, analyse, Apply 
Key Competences: Analytical Thinking, Critical Thinking and Problem solving. 
 
 
 
