
--- PDF_PAGE 254 ---
- 238 - 
 
Chapter 23: Travel and Tourism – 6016  
1. 
Construct 
Applies knowledge and skills in identifying global and local tourism and appreciates cultural diversity for 
sustainable tourism. 
2. 
Elements of Construct 
The Travel and Tourism examination will be based on five (5) Elements of Construct (EoC). Each element 
will have a summary of what it intends to assess.  
EoC1 
Explores tourism dynamics, understand, travellers’ destinations and global challenges in 
tourism 
 Discovers different tourism sectors and identifies their inter dependence within the Zambian 
economy and environment. 
 Markets Zambia‘s tourism and promotes conservation strategies. 
EoC2 
Manages tourism destinations and operations 
 Analyses tourism geography and destination awareness. 
 Demonstrates empathy, cultural sensitivity and professional etiquette when handling various 
travellers.  
EoC3 
Applies key principles of the hospitality industry in travel and tourism 
 Demonstrates the ability to select and associate hospitality principles to diverse needs in 
tourism (special interest tourism).  
 Applies the standards of hospitality check ins and concierge services within agencies and 
hotel settings.  
EoC4 
Operates tourism events and activities 
 Interprets operations of tourism events and activities. 
 Organises tourism events and manages overlaps with minimal disturbances 
 Demonstrates knowledge on entrepreneurial skills in travel and tourism. 
EoC5 
Conducts tour operations 
 Demonstrates tour guiding principles 
 Analyses and utilises safari operation skills. 
3. 
Test Design 
The Travel and Tourism examination will consist of two Components, component 1 and 2. 
Component 1 will be School Based Assessment (SBA) which will be set and scored in schools by subject 
teachers. It will be administered in Form 2 and 3.  
Component 2 will be the Final Examination administered at the end of Form 4. It will be set and marked 
centrally by Examinations Council of Zambia (ECZ) at the end of Form 4.  
The SBA will be weighted 30% while the Final Examination will be weighted 70% by ECZ. 

--- PDF_PAGE 255 ---
- 239 - 
 
Summary of the Test Design for Travel and Tourism – Component 1 and 2 
Component 
Name 
Code 
Number of Test 
Items/ Tasks 
Level 
Duration 
Total 
Marks 
School Based 
Assessment 
Component 1 
6016/1 
6 
Form 2 
1 Year 
100 
6 
 
Form 3 
1 Year 
100 
 
200 
Final 
Examination 
Component 2 
6016/2 
 
6 
Form 4 
2h 15min 
80 
The Test Design will consider Structure and Test Content of the assessment for Travel and Tourism. 
3.1 
Structure 
3.1.1 School Based Assessment - Component 1  
The component will assess learners based on tasks based on all the five EoC.   
There will be a total of fourteen (12) tasks; six (6) at Form 2 and six (6) at Form 3 which will 
have a total of 200 marks at the end of Secondary Education Ordinary Level.  
The structure of the SBA tasks will be determined by the subject teacher and the type of tasks 
with regard to learners‘ abilities and challenges 
3.1.2 Final Examination - Component 2  
The Final Examination will assess all the five EoC. The component will have two sections, A 
and B.  
Section A (20 marks) will have two test items which will come from one EoC and 
candidates will have to choose one item only. Each item will carry 20 marks.  
Section B (60 marks) will have four items derived from the remaining four EoC and they 
will all be compulsory.  Each item will carry 15 marks.  
A candidate will be required to respond to a total of five (5) out of six test items which will 
render Component 2 a total of 80 marks. 
3.1 
Test content  
The test content for both component 1 and 2 will consider Test Item Types, Level of Difficulty and 
Syllabus Coverage. 
3.2.1 
Types of Tasks and Items 
School Based Assessment - Component 1: Will use both formative and summative 
assessments which will consist of structured, semi structured or unstructured tasks which 
will be administered in form of written, practical and projects. The tasks will be drawn 
from all the five EoC. (For details, refer to the School Based Assessment Guidelines for 
Examination for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level for Practical Subjects, 
produced by the ECZ).   
Final Examination - Component 2: will be summative assessment which will consist of 
structured, semi structured or unstructured test items.  
Section A: will assess candidates‘ ability and skills to analyse a scenario and create an 
itinerary, adventure activity, excursion plan, marketing plan or advertisement posters. The 
section will assess candidates’ level of knowledge to interpret given information and ability 
to create or innovate something.   

--- PDF_PAGE 256 ---
- 240 - 
 
Section B: will require candidates to give brief explanations according to the interpretation 
of the task. Each test item will cover related topics and competences as clustered in the 
EoC. The test items will be structured, semi structured or unstructured depending on the 
scenario and competences to be assessed.  
3.2.2 
Syllabus Coverage  
The examination will be derived from the Travel and Tourism Syllabus for Secondary 
Education Ordinary Level, form 1-4 produced by Curriculum Development Centre (CDC 
2024 edition). 
The development of SBA tasks and Final Examination test items will be aligned to the key 
competences such as analytical thinking, citizenship, collaboration creativity and 
innovation, critical thinking, communication, digital literacy, problem solving, 
entrepreneurship, financial literacy, environmental sustainability and emotional intelligence 
as guided in the Syllabus.  
The test items and tasks will also be linked to clusters of related topics and competences 
which have been grouped into EoC. The specific competences are reflected in the SBA Test 
Framework, Test Framework and Test Specification table produced by the ECZ. These 
assessment tools will ensure validity, reliability and comparability of the assessments from 
year to year.   
Distribution of marks across Elements of Construct 1 to 5 for Component 2 
EoC1 
EoC2 
EoC3 
EoC4 
EoC5 
Total Marks 
15 
15 
15 
20 
15 
80 
3.2.3 
Level of Difficulty 
Both Component 1 and 2 will all be Competence Based Assessments. All test items will 
present a real-life scenario and learners will be required to apply critical thinking creativity 
and problem-solving skills in order to come up with expected responses. The level of 
difficulty will be spread according to the way the topics and competences are clustered in 
each EoC.  
School Based Assessment - Component 1 
The SBA will assess all the six levels of the revised Bloom‘s taxonomy with inclination 
towards the higher order skills that focus on applying, analysing, evaluating and creating.  
Final Examination - Component 2 
The final examination will assess candidates across all the six levels of the revised Bloom‘s 
taxonomy with a bias towards the application of the acquired knowledge and understanding 
on real life situations.  
The levels of difficulty for test items and tasks will be determined by the following factors: 
(i) The complexity of the scenario or real-life situation on a given Element of Construct 
that a candidate will be expected to respond to.    
(ii) The subject knowledge and skills required to respond to the real-life problems and 
challenges (level of competence). 
(iii) The complexity and number of cognitive processes required to generate responses to 
test items and tasks. 
(iv) The level of abstract critical thinking involved to arrive at a response.  

--- PDF_PAGE 257 ---
- 241 - 
 
(v) The extent to which a candidate will have to strategise in order to respond to the 
items and tasks. 
Distribution of marks across the revised levels of Bloom‟s Taxonomy: Component 2 
Cognitive Level 
Remembering Understanding Applying Analysing Evaluating 
Creating 
Marks 
Marks Distribution 
05 
25 
15 
20 
05 
10 
80 
 
4. 
Scoring Criteria 
School Based Assessment - Component 1: will be scored by teachers in their respective schools as 
guided by scoring guides and rubrics found in the School Based Assessment Guidelines for Examination 
for Certificate of Secondary Education Ordinary Level for Practical Subjects produced by the ECZ. 
Final Examination - Component 2: will be marked centrally by the ECZ using marking schemes 
provided by the ECZ. (Refer to Chapter 30 on Grading and Certification). 
NB: To achieve an overall mark for Travel and Tourism, a candidate must sit both components. No overall 
grade will be awarded to a candidate who absents from any of the components. 
5. 
Notes and Guidelines - Component 1 and 2 
SN 
Notes and Guidelines 
Component 
5.1 
Candidates should demonstrate the application of knowledge and understanding of 
concepts and theories through critical thinking in order to generate required 
responses to problems rather than just memorising facts. 
1 and 2 
5.2 
All the five (5) EoC should be assessed and each candidate should have an 
experience of each EoC. 
1 and 2 
5.3 
Candidates will be required to respond to a total of five (5) out of six test items at a 
total of 80 marks. 
2 
5.4 
Teachers should administer formative assessment tasks along side teaching as part 
of teaching and learning process. 
1 
5.5 
Teachers should administer a total of 14 SBA tasks; 7 at Form 2 and 7 at Form 3 and 
submit all scores to ECZ. 
1 
5.6 
Projects in form of presentations, research work or artifacts should be strictly 
supervised and scored at each stage as opposed to receiving completely finished 
projects. 
1 
5.7 
Teachers should utilise group work tasks during practicing and perfecting learners‘ 
skills but for tasks that are meant to be submitted to ECZ, individual tasks are 
preferred where applicable. 
1 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 258 ---
- 242 - 
 
6. 
Exemplar Test Items  
Example 1:  Component I or 2 
EoC3 
Applies key principles of the hospitality industry in travel and tourism 
Item 1 (Written task 20marks) 
You are a Customer Service representative at G travel Agency, and you have been contacted by a couple from Ndola 
that is planning to visit Livingstone for five nights. The couple will travel by road to site see since it‘s their first time 
and return by air. They have asked you to suggest any activities for them except the wife has fear of animals (Zoo-
phobia).  
Task 1: Recommend to the couple any five water activities you would like them to experience and why.                            
(5Marks)   
Expected Response 
Victoria falls tour; Zambezi river cruise; Bungee jumping; Sunset boot cruse; White water rafting 
Level of difficulty: Analysing 
Task 2: Analyse five measures you would take to ensure safety during their visit.              (5 Marks)                                   
Expected response 
-Reputable operators: vet all tour operators to ensure they have excellent safety records and trained guides. 
- Safety briefing: provide a comprehensive briefing covering general travel safety 
- Travel insurance: verify the clients have adequate travel insurance covering medical emergencies and activity 
participation 
- Emergency contact: Ensure the clients have a reliable 24/7 emergency contact number for the agency 
-Health precautions: 
Advice on necessary vaccinations. 
Level of difficulty: Evaluating; Analysing 
Task 3: Generate a budget for their full stay in Livingstone           (5marks)                                                                           
Expected Response 
Accommodation; transport; food and beverages; activities from day 1 to 5; miscellaneous.  
Level of difficulty: Analysing; evaluating; creating 
Task 4: Caution the client on measures they should take to ensure their visit is beneficial and respectful to the local 
community.                                                (5marks) 
Expected Response 
Abide by local rules; buy souvenirs from local artefacts; respect wild animals; respect people;  
Level of difficulty: Understanding;  
 
 
 
 
 

--- PDF_PAGE 259 ---
- 243 - 
 
 
Example 2: Component 1 or 2 
EoC 1: Explores tourism dynamics, understand, travellers’ destinations and global challenges in tourism 
Item 1 (Written task 20marks) 
A Chinese company is planning to set up an eco lodge in Kansanka National Park in Luapula, Zambia. The proprietors 
know very little about the place and Zambia at large. You have been contracted as their consultant. One of the 
objectives of the lodge is to offer guests an environmentally friendly and culturally immerse experiences.                          
Task 1:  Discuss three pillars of tourism that the proprietors will need to apply as they plan to put up an eco lodge             
(6Marks)   
Expected Response 
- Environmental sustainability: conserving natural resources and minimizing negative impacts on environment, crucial 
for an eco-lodge. 
- Economic sustainability: viability of the business while providing local employment and benefits to the host 
community. 
- Social cultural sustainability: Respecting the host communities‘ culture and heritage, providing culturally immersive 
experiences as desired by the target market. 
Level of difficulty: Analysing; Evaluating 
Task 2:   Propose three accommodation establishments that should be included in the plan for an eco lodge                        
(6 Marks) 
Expected Response 
-Bungalows: can be built using sustainable local materials, blending into the natural environment. 
-Tree houses: offer a unique, immersive experience within nature, appealing to the target market seeking 
environmentally friendly stays. 
-Tented camps: provide a lower-impact alternative to permanent structures maintaining a close-to-nature feel. 
Level of difficulty: Evaluating: Analysing 
Task 3: Evaluate four features that qualify an eco-lodge with regards to star-rating system that you and the propriator 
must apply in the plan                                                      (8marks) 
Expected response 
- Sustainable building materials: use of local, renewable, recycled materials can contribute to higher ratings by 
demonstrating environmental responsibility. 
- Waste management systems: comprehensive systems for recycling, composting and treating wastewater are essential 
features that qualify for eco-rating. 
- Community involvement: Active engagement with and benefit to the local community is a key criterion in many 
sustainable tourism certification and rating system. 
- Renewable energy and habitant protection, which helps preserve the local ecosystem in Luapula. 
Level of difficulty: Evaluating: Analysing 
 
